I decided today needed to be an all
Trader Joe's day. Actually, I got to
show you. Check out my haul. Oh,
>> tote bag. You are styling. Take that to
Europe.
>> I've got
some Chewbacc.
>> Nice.
>> Got so many nuts.
>> So many nuts.
>> Some chocolate, some cheese. Little
picnic we're going to have here in the
recording studio.
All right. Here I am popping this bottle
of Charles Shaw and
we are ready to go.
>> That might be the nicest wine opener
that has ever been used for Tuck Chuck.
>> All right, let's do it.
>> Who got the truth?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Who got
the truth now?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Sit me
down. Say it straight. Another story on
the way. Who got the truth?
>> Welcome to the fall 2025 season of
Acquired, the podcast about great
companies and the stories and playbooks
behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert.
>> I'm David Rosenthal.
>> And we are your hosts. Peanut butter fil
pretzel nuggets.
>> Some Hold the Cone mini ice cream cones,
plantain chips, and mandarin orange
chicken. These are a few of the items I
picked up this week on my trip to Trader
Joe's. Mhm.
>> You know, David had to do a research
trip. It was mandatory.
>> Had to do the research trip.
>> I don't think I've ever spent more money
at Trader Joe's cuz I just said yes to
everything and it felt like I needed to
have it all.
>> But you couldn't have spent that much
money. That's part of the point.
>> Listeners, America seems to have an
obsession with this grocery store,
Trader Joe's. It's a strange mashup of a
health food store that carries
interesting and quirky products inspired
by traveling the South Seas, but for
value conscious shoppers. And they break
every rule in grocery retailing. It's
not that convenient. They don't stock
all the things you need to buy each
week. You can't buy online. You can't
get it delivered in any way. Even as the
whole world turns to grocery e-commerce,
parking is reliably horrible. I mean,
every Trader Joe's I've ever been to.
>> Part of the strategy, Ben. It's part of
the strategy.
>> Apparently, the stores are small and I'm
always bumping into other shoppers.
There's never any sales or discounts and
they don't offer any coupons. They sell
almost none of your favorite known brand
names and their produce leaves a lot to
be desired. And yet people love it. I
mean, in an era where most grocery
chains are being disrupted, Trader Joe's
cult following has driven it to be more
successful than ever, as far as we can
tell from the outside, at least because
it is an intensely private company.
>> Yes, it is.
>> But this is the perfect example of
something that we talk a lot about on
Acquired. Aligning all the trade-offs
you make in your business to all work
together in a beautiful,
self-reinforcing puzzle. Trader Joe's is
not the best grocery store, but it might
be your favorite store. And today we
dive into how this travel themed
pseudoalthy national neighborhood
grocery chain came to exist from the
unlikeliest of places as a clone trying
to rip off 7-Eleven in the 1960s.
>> I mean, I wrote this whole script and
everything you just said is accurate,
but it sounds ridiculous. Should we just
stop the episode there? Do you feel
that's sufficient?
>> All right. Well, listeners, if you want
to know every time an episode drops,
join our email list. You will also get
to vote on future episode topics, get
corrections from past episodes, see all
the images that we are talking about in
episodes. That's acquired.fm/e.
After you listen, come talk about this
with the entire Slack community.
acquired.fm/slack.
If you want more acquired, check out our
interview show, ACQ2. Search ACQ2 in any
podcast player to listen. And before we
dive in, we want to briefly thank our
presenting partner, JP Morgan Payments.
>> Yes, just like how we say every company
has a story, every company's story is
powered by payments. And JP Morgan
Payments is a part of so many of their
journeys from seed to IPO and beyond.
>> So with that, David, happy 10 year
anniversary.
>> Happy 10y year anniversary. Toast my two
buck chuck to you right now.
>> You've got the two buck chuck open bit.
I've got mine sitting right here. I'm
waiting to open it until the end of the
episode when I tell the amazing story of
how it came to be. Cheers.
>> Well, cheers listeners. We are recording
this on the 10-year anniversary of
posting our very first episode. It has
been an amazing 10 years with all of
you. Thank you so much for listening.
>> What a journey together.
>> With that, listeners, this show is not
investment advice. Dave and I may have
investments in the companies we discuss
and this show is forformational and
entertainment purposes only. David
Rosenthal, where are we starting our
story? Oh man. Well, I wish that you and
I had investments in this company, but
unfortunately only one person in the
world does, and he's deceased, as we
will see at the end of the episode.
>> Yes. We start with Trader Joe himself,
Joe Cologne, because you can't separate
Trader Joe's from Trader Joe. Joe
Colomme was born in 1930 in San Diego,
California. The same hotbed of American
retailing innovation that produced Salt
Price, Price Club, and everything that
would become Costco. We so lovingly
talked about on that episode a few years
ago. Joe's father was an engineer at
Conveyor, an aircraft manufacturer in
Southern California in the defense
industry there. and his mother was a
school teacher and perhaps inspired by
his mother. Joe is a very good student,
he ends up going to Stanford for his
undergrad. He gets his undergrad degree
in economics in 1952
and then somewhat unusually for the time
he stays on at Stanford for an extra two
years and he gets an MBA at the Stanford
Graduate School of Business in 1954. You
know, there's a lot of famous Stanford
alumni. This is not one that people are
walking around quoting. You know, Joe
Colom was a GSB alum. Like, he's not
the, you know, the Phil Knights come to
mind. Back then, not that many people
were going to business school, or at
least not Stanford business school. And
reflecting that, Joe goes to get a job
after GSB. And the only job he can get
is back in Southern California at the
lowly Owl Drug Company, which is a
subsidiary of the larger Rexol drug
company, a line of regional drug stores
throughout America. And this is a
struggling company. How times have
changed for new GSP grads these days in
the job market. So what was Al? Al was a
chain of 300 drugstores up and down the
West Coast. So Joe gets hired by an
executive named Bud Fiser who
specifically wanted to bring in a recent
MBA grad to research alternatives for
turning around owl. The company is
struggling. So Joe goes off and he scour
the country and comes across a
relatively new concept coming out of
Texas. launched by a company called the
Southland Corporation called the
Convenience Store. And Southland has
just recently rebranded their stores
that they are operating very
successfully in Texas in this
convenience store model to something
called 7Elevens.
Ah, yes. The history of 7-Eleven and the
Southland Corporation is fascinating and
probably merits an acquired episode of
its own someday. Here is a list of crazy
things about 7-Eleven. One, today, 2025,
they have more stores than any other
retailer in the entire world. They are
the largest retailer in the world by
number of stores,
>> which is not the way that you should be
impressed by a retail company, but it is
impressive.
>> No, their market cap is about $30
billion. So, like a small fraction of
Walmart and Costco and Amazon, etc. Two,
they invented the to-go coffee cup.
>> That's wild.
>> And also the self-s serve soda fountain.
And then this is my favorite. In the
70s, the Southland Corporation
franchised the 7-Eleven concept to a
company in Japan, a supermarket chain
there. It became so successful in Japan
and 7-Elevens in Japan are like so
deeply part of the Japanese culture that
in the '9s 7-Eleven Japan bought out the
7-Eleven parent and now own the company.
7-Eleven today is a publicly traded
Japanese company on the Tokyo Stock
Exchange, founded in Dallas, Texas that
operates the largest global retail chain
in the world.
>> Of course. Of course.
>> Incredible. But for our purposes today,
back to its original instantiation as
part of the Southland Corporation, how
did this come to be? So, Southland was
founded in the 1920s as an ice company.
>> Oh, yes.
>> This is before home refrigerators were a
thing. People had ice boxes in their
houses and they had to get their ice
somewhere.
>> I've actually got the whole history on
this. Can I take it?
>> Yeah, go for it.
>> All right. So listeners, this comes from
Benjamin Lore who wrote the exceptional
book, The Secret Life of Groceries,
which we're going to reference a bunch
in this episode. So Southland had a
chain, David, of what you're talking
about, these ice docks where people
would bring their muledrawn wagons and
pick up ice in the Texas heat, pre-cars,
pre-refrigerators, pre- freezers, pre-
anything. So this innovation happens
where in 1927 a guy named John Jefferson
Green figures out, hey, I don't think
people want to leave their house in the
middle of the Texas heat in the summer
to bring their mule and wagon over to
get the ice. I think we should do it
when it's a little bit cooler outside.
What if we open at like 7 am and we stay
open late till like 11 p.m.
>> So our customers can come get their ice
for their ice boxes when it's not going
to melt on the way home.
>> That is exactly right. This meant, of
course, that his hours are now even
longer than the general stores where
people are going and getting their
goods. So, as legend has it, a woman
comes up to his icetock and says, "You
know, you're the only thing open right
now. I really wish you stocked milk." in
addition to your ice.
>> Makes sense. I buy my ice from my ice
box from you. Why can't I buy the things
that I put in my ice box?
>> Exactly. And so John Jefferson Green
immediately calls the folks he knows at
the Southland Corporation, kind of the
parent, and says, "If you give me the
money, I'll source milk and eggs and
bread, and I'll split the profits with
you. This way, you can kind of be in
another line of business. We've got this
stand. We may as well do this, too." And
the convenience store was born. or more
effectively, the first 7-Eleven, even
though it wouldn't be fully rebranded
yet, this becomes 7-Eleven.
>> And this, of course, seems obvious
today, like, oh, why didn't anybody try
this before? This is the heyday of the
milkman and the produce man and the
poultry man. These things get delivered
or you pick them up in a market in town.
The modern supermarket, let alone
convenience store, doesn't exist yet.
>> We're so far from that. Yeah.
>> So, this was a truly kind of wild idea.
And over the next few years they start
adding other daily items you might want.
Bread, beer, cigarettes, magazines, etc.
People love it. Then fast forward after
World War II when the American economy
is booming. People have cars, people are
moving to suburbs, people get
refrigerators, they no longer need ice
anymore. The company just completely
sheds the ice business and becomes the
7-Eleven business. 1946 they officially
changed the name of the stores to their
operating hours 7-Eleven.
>> And David, you're talking about the rise
of the automobile and refrigerators
happening. That technology change and
the postWorld War II shift means this
thing has perfect product market fit. By
1951,
it becomes Texas's largest retailer of
beverages, milk, and bread. They've got
a little under a 100red stores. This is
like a movement. They found the formula
and they just expanded incredibly fast
to meet the desire of customers. So if
you fast forward then 14 more years in
1965, what does this look like? In that
year, they opened 398
stores in a single year. I think all in
Texas.
>> Yeah. For context, Trader Joe's today in
2025 has 600 stores. So 7-Eleven is
blowing the doors off.
>> This is true blitzcaling that's
happening to sort of fully seize this
opportunity that people are clearly
going crazy for.
>> Like we said, they are the largest
retailer in the world by number of
stores today. Crazy.
>> There's this sort of delicious thing in
the history of retail and the history of
grocery where when we're sitting here
today, you sort of look at these models
and you're like, there's nothing
innovative about that. This is
completely obvious. And at the time,
this was breakthrough. This was
completely innovative. Yeah.
Yes. Well, speaking of completely
obvious, back to Joe and the Trader
Joe's story. He's working at Al for Bud.
>> And this is like the mid50s. So, this is
right as 7-Eleven is starting to really
scale up, but before it's hitting those
sort of crazy hundreds of stores per
year number.
>> Yep. They get wind of what's happening.
Joe travels to Texas and they're like,
there is absolutely no reason that this
won't work in California. We got to turn
around Al. Let's just copy paste this
7-Eleven thing. Now remember, Al is part
of this bigger conglomerate of Rexel,
this slowmoving ship. So he comes back,
they're like, "Oh, we're going to do
this." And Rexel's like, "I don't know."
You know, it's corporate bureaucracy. It
gets slowed down. Bud can't push it
through with the powers that be.
>> And I guess a drugstore was actually
pretty different than a convenience
store at this point.
>> So then this is like the path almost
taken for Joe. He gets a call from
another Southern California company one
day that is also looking to recruit
recent MBA grads this time to help them
with their management of their new
successful startup business line that
they've started. This is the
semiconductor division, the new startup
division of the Hughes aircraft company.
And Joe actually jumps ship for 18
months and goes and works at Hughes and
he's basically like the CFO of their
semiconductor division.
>> Joe works in semiconductors.
>> Yes. During which time it grows 700%.
>> Shock semiconductor had just gotten
started. We're about to hit Fairchild
and Intel. Silicon Valley is about to
boom. There was this whole alternative
path that Trader Joe might have actually
been like a Traitor 8 or something like.
>> Wow.
>> Totally wild. So he's on this path,
>> but then he leaves Hughes.
>> So then Bud calls him back up after 18
months that he's been at Hughes and he's
like, "All right, I've finally persuaded
Rexall to go ahead with the cloning
7-Eleven concept. We've got the
go-ahhead. You did all the research.
You've been there on the ground. You are
the guy to run this. I want to hire you
back. M
>> I'm going to make you president of our
new division within Al that is going to
copy 7-Eleven and bring convenience
stores to Southern California.
>> Just a few years out of business school
and I get to be the president of
something that's corporate approved.
Let's go.
>> So at age 27, he comes back to
Owl/Rexall as the new president of the
newly christened Pronto Markets.
Pronto convenience store. You're in,
you're out. Pronto.
>> Giddy up.
They build six Pronto convenience stores
in the LA metro area as a pilot and off
to the races as you would expect. It
works great. Instant product market fit.
Tons of demand. They're blowing the
doors off.
>> And I should say, I looked up some of
the stuff they were selling.
>> This is awesome.
>> Of course, it's like cheese and eggs and
bread and stuff. It's also ammo.
>> Ammunition for guns. Yes. like very
successful, high volume business,
tobacco, selling what Joe calls girly
magazines,
>> pornographic magazines. This is not the
Trader Joe's that you know today.
>> That's exactly right.
>> And that might have been the story. Joe
might have built the 7-Eleven of the
West Coast, except that the parent
company Rexol had a couple different
irons in the fire for turnarounds here.
And one of the other irons was they had
bought another little startup company
called Tupperware.
>> Oh yes.
>> The multi-level marketing maker of food
containers.
>> Right. Come over. We'll have a little
party at my house and I'll sell you some
Tupperware cuz you're my neighbor.
>> You can't make this stuff up. As they
bought Tupperware, it becomes so
successful that the management team
that's running Rexol is like, "Screw
this crappy retail business. We're going
all in on products and multi-level
marketing." They decide that they're
going to sell off the entire retail
division piece by piece and buy a bunch
of other product. They end up buying
Duracell, the battery company, which
would eventually be owned by Berkshire.
>> Crazy.
>> And isn't there something with oil here
where like the owners of Rexol wanted to
fully invest in the supplier of
Tupperware. So, they bought into like an
oil business. Yes.
>> And they needed to free up the capital
to do that. They were super all in on
Tupperware.
>> Yes.
>> Interesting.
>> So, this leaves Joe, you know, he's 27,
28. He just quit his job in
semiconductors, right? Like he's got a
wife, he's got like a young family, and
he's got a successful early business
here that he's running. So he goes to
Rexall and he says, "Hey, rather than
just selling off Pronto as part of all
the drugstore operations, what if I buy
just these six pronto markets from you,
do like a management buyout?"
>> But of course, Joe has no money.
>> Yes, he has no money.
>> He doesn't come from a wealthy family.
He hasn't really earned money yet.
>> Yes. So the Rexol CFO says, "All right,
I'll tell you what. I will sell these
things to you for $10,000 over the book
value that we essentially have these
leases on on our books.
>> And what's book value on this?
>> Book value is $15,000.
>> So if you can scrape together $25,000, I
will sell you pronto markets. And
inflation adjusted, this is now the
early 60s. This would have been about
$250,000 today. Joe and his wife Alice
sell their house to raise money for
this.
>> Wow. They borrow money from their
parents.
>> This is like full-on Savannah bananas.
>> Full-on Savannah bananas. You know,
Jesse Cole
>> may as well be on an air mattress in a
garage
>> instead of a yellow tuxedo. You know,
Joe is wearing a Hawaiian shirt here.
>> Yes.
>> That only gets them to like $14,000.
He needs another $11,000.
>> So, it's like his whole net worth now
cuz he doesn't own a home and he's
borrowed money from his parents. He
decides to do a combination of two
things for the remaining $11,000. One,
he goes to Bank of America, takes out a
loan. Still, they won't loan him enough
money to get all the way to the 25,000.
He goes to the current employees of the
six pronto stores and he says, "Look, I
believe in this. I have sold my house. I
have borrowed money. You guys obviously
believe in this with me. We see how it's
working. I will offer to you to also
invest in this buyout at book value. So
I will give you the valuation that it is
on the books
>> at Rexall even though I'm buying it at
$10,000 above book.
>> So he's giving him what a 40% discount
on the price that he's paying for his
shares.
>> Yes. and collectively with equity
dollars invested by the employees, his
partners, they get to the $25,000.
Summer of 1962, they close the deal and
Joe and the employees become the owners
of the newly incorporated Pronto
Markets. Joe writes in his great great
great autobiography called Becoming
Trader Joe that came out a couple years
ago that employees owned about half the
company. I don't think it's quite half.
That doesn't pencil out, but it was a
significant chunk. At least a quarter,
if not a third of the company is owned
by these early employees.
>> It's interesting that their entry price
is actually lower than his. I was doing
the research and I tried to figure out
the total return since Joe bought in.
His employees actually got a better
multiple. So, anybody who held Yeah.
>> from that original date all the way
through till uh well, spoiler alert, he
sells the business later would have beat
Joe by, you know, almost 2x.
>> Yeah. But even more importantly though,
almost nothing from pronto markets
survives to Trader Joe's today. You
know, not the ammo, not the cigarettes,
not the girly magazines, but this does.
But the sort of respect for employees,
>> the spirit of treating your employees as
partners.
>> Yes. And I think right after he takes it
over is when he sets his really
aggressive employee comp plan. A thing
you commonly hear about Trader Joe's
today that he did right away is, "We're
going to have some of the highest paid
employees in the industry and we're
going to attract the best talent by just
effectively overpaying for everyone."
>> Basically, every employee at Trader
Joe's get paid between 40 and 150% over
what average compensation is for their
roles in retail.
>> I saw 60% over, so it kind of falls in
that range. I say overpaid, but Joe's
philosophy on this is it's not
overpaying because we're attracting the
best people and because we're setting up
all the right incentives, they're just
going to make the product that much
better for customers. We're going to do
clever things like rotate the employees
around. No one's just a cashier. They're
working in all the different jobs, so
they get to know the business really
well. They get to be really
knowledgeable about the products. And
then if anybody asks us anything about
them, literally anybody on staff could
have the right answer.
>> Also carries through right to this day.
Every Trader Joe's you go to, there's a
captain who's essentially the manager of
the store. There's a first mate who's an
assistant manager, and then everybody
else does the same job.
>> H the nautical naming.
>> There's no dedicated cashiers. There's
no dedicated baggers. There's no
dedicated stalkers. Everybody does
everything.
>> All right. So, everything's going to go
great, right? He pulled together this
capital. He's leveraged to the gills. He
owes money all over town. All these
employees have bet their life savings on
him, too. So he's leveraged to the gills
just to do the buyout. You're not going
to get far just with the buyout. You
also need like a balance sheet to have
working capital to get product to
expand. He also doesn't want to have
just six convenience stores here. He
wants to expand, open new stores. So
shortly after doing the buyout, he goes
to one of his biggest suppliers, a dairy
company called Ador Milk Farms, A D H O
R, which is ROA, spelled backwards. Come
back to that in a minute. He goes to the
owner and president of Ador, guy named
Merritt Adamson Jr., and says, "Hey,
let's do a deal here. I need financing
for working capital expansion, all these
things. You need distribution. You give
me debt financing and pronto will
exclusively carry ador dairy products,
you know, milk, ice cream.
>> Nothing like borrowing money from your
most important supplier.
>> Yeah. Right, right, right.
>> It's good because they know your
business really well and you're working
together anyway, but
>> it can work great, but you're really
leveraged now on this one supplier.
>> Yes. I really need your goods and I also
really need your money and I really need
you to stay happy with me so that
nothing bad happens to any of these
covenants or whatever in the debt.
>> Yep. So over the first couple years it
does go great. Pronto becomes Ador's
largest retailer and then in October of
Joe goes to meet Merritt for his monthly
lunch meeting with him. They have
monthly lunch meetings to check in about
the business, the relationship. Then
Merritt starts drinking. He orders one
gin and burmoose, two gin and bermoose,
three. He orders his fourth gin
cocktail. And Joe's like, "All right,
he's got something he needs to tell me."
And uh it's not going to be good news.
>> Yes. And listeners, before David breaks
the news to us of what is going to
happen, there are three pieces of
background that are worth knowing about
ADOR and about the dairy industry at
this moment in time that sets up this
meeting. One, refrigeration has gone
mainstream at this point.
>> Yes, 1965, we're well past the ice box
era.
>> People's buying patterns have changed.
Convenience stores have now popped up
everywhere. So, this sort of dampened
demand for milkmen since people are now
picking up their own milk. And so, the
adhor company has had to do this crazy
rejiggering of who is actually selling
their product. And I said it a minute
ago that Pronto, still relatively little
Pronto markets in LA, is Ador's now
largest seller of their products. That
is not a good sign for Ador.
They are not doing good here. All right.
So why are they not doing well? Well,
the American preference was shifting
from whole milk to skim milk. And you
might just say, "Oh, well, I'm sure they
just skim the fat off. That's part of
the process. I assume that's what
happens." There are different cows that
produce milk that is well suited to be
whole milk versus well suited to be
skimm milk. There's holen cows which
produce white chalky milk that you sort
of expect to become skim milk. There's
these gernzie cows. The milk has this
yellowish hue to them. It produces this
really rich creamy milk. Unfortunately,
Ador had mostly Gernzie cows. And Ador,
it's not like they have just a few of
these. They are the nation's largest
dairy farm and they have the wrong kind
of cow for where the future is going.
In one minute, it will all become clear
to you why they are the nation's largest
dairy farm by real estate at least, and
why their cows are real fat and real
happy. But continue for the moment. And
then third, there's another thing
happening, which is it's not just Joe
who realizes that 7-Eleven is a good
idea in California. It's also 7-Eleven
and other competitors that pop up, too.
>> Yes. So, what is the news?
Well,
after the fourth drink, the news that
Merritt finally shares with Joe is that
he has made the difficult decision to
sell the family business that or dairy
operation.
That's troubling enough to Joe. This is
his biggest financing partner, biggest
supplier. It's like, all right, well,
who's the buyer? And Mar's like, "The
buyer is the Southland Corporation.
7-Eleven is coming to California and
they needed a dairy supplier and um
yeah, I sold our operations to them."
>> Brutal.
>> Not good. Not good.
>> Not great, Bob.
>> All right. So, what's really going on
here? So at the same time as Merritt is
having these problems with the family
operations of running a dairy farm, he
also has a incredible opportunity that
is the flip side of the coin. Why are
the cattle so fat, so happy, and
distributed across so much land?
>> And what has Merritt inherited that's
been passed down through generations of
his family?
>> Why is it called Ador and what is Roda?
His mother Roa was the descendant and
inheritor of the original California
Spanish land grant of the area that is
now the entire city of Malibu.
The most today expensive attractive real
estate in perhaps the entire country.
They own the entire city. This is the
dairy farm. The cows are grazing in
Malibu.
>> Yes,
>> you can't make this up. And so they have
finally made the rational decision here
to sell off the dairy operations and
develop this as real estate, which they
had already been doing little by little.
>> So Pronto Markets is toast. 7-Eleven is
at least a thousand times bigger and any
landlord is going to want to sign them
over little pronto markets in real
estate. Having the bigger balance sheet
is the way to be the preferred tenant.
Especially if you can promise, hey,
longer leases and we're more creditw
worthy
>> and the operating history. Yeah. You're
a landlord. Would you rather have
7-Eleven be your tenant or start up
pronto markets? You're going to bet on
7-Eleven.
>> Yes. And that not only takes away his
milk supply, that's also his current
debt holder who he owes money to. And
he's in this business that has no
structural or strategic barriers at all.
He is doing the exact same thing as
7-Eleven at smaller scale. And so the
core insight is that pronto markets is
effectively just an empty vessel to sell
the same products. In a situation like
that, it is a race to the bottom on your
margins and scale will determine the
winner.
>> So, in other words, pronto markets is
toast.
>> Yes.
>> So, Joe has some soularching to do.
>> He needs a retreat.
>> He goes on vacation. He takes his wife
and children
>> first to a little cabin in California
with his family. Then he goes to St.
Barts in the Caribbean. He somehow gets
in touch with a friend who offers this
insane beach house. and he's like,
"Well, I've never flown internationally
before and I don't really have the
money, but I really do need a reset. We
are royally screwed."
>> He needs to come up with a plan.
>> Yes.
>> And that plan would become Trader Joe's.
But before we tell that story, now is a
great time to thank our presenting
partner, JP Morgan Payments.
>> Yes. And listeners, this episode with
Trader Joe's, supply chain is much more
important than your typical acquired
episode. We're sort of touching on it
here, but the whole rest of the episode
is going to be about supply chain. When
you are talking about supply chain,
payments are a huge part of keeping
shelves stocked and products moving. So,
let's consider a typical manufacturer.
They're trying to balance paying their
suppliers quickly to keep good
relationships while also optimizing
their own working capital. And
meanwhile, their suppliers, especially
the smaller ones, often struggle with
cash flow while they wait 30 or 60 or 90
days to get paid. This is where JP
Morgan's payments technology and global
expertise come in. They've transformed
supply chain financing into a dynamic
techdriven solution. Their platform,
which supports multiple languages and
currencies, links buyers to more than
18,000 suppliers, streamlining payables
and giving suppliers the option for
early payment at favorable rates based
on the buyer's credit rating. Businesses
can easily switch between supply chain
finance and dynamic discounting as their
needs change. It's all real time with
full visibility, so you can track
invoices and optimize payment timing in
one place. While supply chains like
Trader Joe's prioritize simplicity,
which spoiler alert, that is like a huge
thing that we're going to talk about
later in the episode. The reality for
most grocery retailers is different.
They have massive numbers of suppliers
stocking shelves with a diverse mix of
products. But managing these
relationships is complex, especially
when it comes to negotiating payment
terms and maintaining a steady flow of
goods. And this is not unique to
grocery. Many other industries like
restaurants, automotive, hardware,
technology, and more depend on a large
network of suppliers. And in all
likelihood, your industry can benefit
from optimizing payment cycles and
strengthening supplier relationships.
That's why over 2 million suppliers
worldwide use these solutions. It's a
win-win, making supply chains more
resilient and efficient. JP Morgan
Payments is at the forefront, providing
trusted, innovative financial and
operational infrastructure. So whether
you want to unlock more flexibility in
your finances or build a supply chain
that's ready for anything, visit
jporggan.com/acquired
to learn how JP Morgan payments can help
you build your business. And listeners,
for anyone going to AWS reinvent, we
will be there with the JP Morgan
Payments team. We're doing a big
interview on stage with AWS CEO Matt
Garmin and more. You can find all of the
details on that, plus a reinvent
discount for acquired listeners in the
show notes.
All right. So, David, the origin of
Trader Joe's. Joe is there in St. Barts
in his beach house, cocktail in hand,
looking out over the ocean, thinking
about how absolutely screwed he is. He
effectively
>> And the plan is cocktails.
>> Effectively,
>> the plan is tiki.
>> Yeah.
The crazy thing that he does on this
vacation and then henceforth his
management style, he is a genius. He
premeditates the entire shifting
landscape over the next 30 years ahead
of him and he does it 5 years at a time
in what he calls white papers or at
other times theory papers that he
publishes internally. He carefully
thinks through things like social change
and cultural shifts and geopolitics and
currency fluctuations, shifts in how
people will be educated and consumer
buying preferences and travel patterns.
As I really dug into this, Joe's
somewhat of a macroeconomist who once he
realized where the world was going, he
places his bet in the form of a highly
opinionated grocery store and then he
would execute much of that vision
himself. I mean like physically moving
pallets and type setting newsletters for
customers. He is a complete unicorn.
>> Okay, so Joe comes back from this
vacation and what does he do? Yes, he's
a genius, but he also he's got like a
real back against the wall problem,
>> right? He's thought through all these
implications. He's forecasted the future
and he's going to go out of business.
>> He needs to make his rent this month.
So he needs to find something that he
can start selling that is basically the
ven diagram intersection of high enough
value that he can get real gross margin
dollars out the bottom from his small
handful number of stores to meet his
obligations. He needs it to quickly
become a good business,
>> quickly provide returns,
and is protected from the 7-Eleven
juggernaut that's coming because you
never want to compete with someone
bigger, more established, better
capitalized than you on the exact same
footing that they're on. You need to do
something different that they can't or
won't do.
>> Yep. And he lands on hard alcohol.
This is the hilarious thing about Trader
Joe's. It actually starts as a hard
liquor company.
>> It's a ammo and tobacco company that
gets into hard liquor.
>> Right. Right. Right.
>> So hard liquor is actually very very
very attractive here. It's very high
value. There are a set of laws called
fair trade laws that impact everything
that retailers sell in this era. It's
actually kind of crazy. It's a holdover
from the depression. We talked about it
on the Costco episode where it was
illegal for retailers to sell goods
below the minimum price set by
manufacturers.
>> Right? It's not just MSRP. It's not just
a suggested retail price. It's you will
go to jail if we catch you selling below
the price that the cabal of producers of
any given good set.
>> Yes. Once all this stuff gets thrown out
and ruled unconstitutional, etc. Now
it's suggested. back then it was like
mandated. But the net of that is if you
can find a way to sell hard alcohol
because they're high dollar value, you
know, you're going to get a certain
amount of profit out of it.
>> And the way this works is you need to
make sure you get liquor licenses, which
are hard. But if you have a liquor
license, then it's like an annuity.
People are definitely going to come to
your store. They're definitely going to
buy liquor and you have a regulatory
protected profit on that liquor.
>> Yes. And that's the moat against
7-Eleven. 7-Eleven giant Southland
Corporation. They're not going to come
to California and get liquor licenses
for all these stores that they're going
to open. They're out of state
corporation. Like Joe can be much more
nimble.
>> He can invest the time and the money.
These things cost a lot of money back in
the day because they're basically, like
you said, a guaranteed annuity profit
stream.
>> And he can invest at a small scale,
raise more debt to do this. and this is
his way out.
>> And that was basically his bet is
7-Eleven because this is like a small
little arm of their operation. They're
not going to change their sort of
national business model to in this
little pocket have liquor.
>> I think that's right. And I think they
did not sell hard liquor period at that
point in time. It just wasn't part of
their strategy.
>> Okay, I see. And there's one other
perhaps unforeseen at the time, but
ultimately incredibly
strategic benefit to this decision to go
all in on hard liquor, which is it's
also a moat against supermarkets and the
grocery industry.
>> They're not going to do hard liquor
either,
>> at least at this point in time.
>> So he goes raises more capital,
gets the licenses.
>> This is like the third trunch of debt
that he's taken on now. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So, it works for a couple
years.
Pronto Markets
basically transforms into a liquor store
and it buys Joe a couple years to figure
out the bigger business plan and stave
off the invasion from 7-Eleven. They're
still selling other stuff in the stores,
but they start devoting more and more
and more space to liquor because it's
highest value per square foot. They have
a regulated, protected right to sell it
that their competitors don't have. I
mean, there's an alternative world where
Trader Joe's basically becomes Total
Wine or Bemo or something like that.
>> Yeah. If they had just kept scaling the
strategy linearly instead of completely
changing tracks and going in this other
direction.
>> Yep. All right. So, let's talk about
supermarkets.
>> Listeners, I did sort of a brief history
of supermarkets in America to come up to
speed on what Trader Joe's does
differently and how we got here. So, you
go way back all the way to pre-Ivil War
America and you've got general stores.
We all sort of have this loose idea of
what this looks like. You got one
counter. There's a bunch of goods that
you can see, but it's not self-s served.
You don't get to go pick up any goods
yourself. The employee of the general
store or more than likely the owner is
just going to be the person who fetches
it for you and then checks you out. That
is kind of the retail experience in
America pre- Civil War. Then there's
this series of innovations that advanced
from this to the grocery store. So the
first is the box, the cardboard box
>> and specifically precut corrugated
cardboard boxes happen in the 1890s.
It's rigid, it's cheap, and it enables
shipping at scale. So suddenly you can
have regular shipments in predictable
quantities inexpensively between
producer and retailer. That's puzzle
piece number one. Then you've got the
flatbottomed paper bag that had happened
a little bit before in the Civil War.
They used to use cotton bags, but it's
in short supply because you need cotton
for the soldiers. And so necessity is
the mother of invention. We get the
brown paper bag. You have canning.
Before this, you only had glass. It
would break. It was fragile. It was
expensive. Suddenly, you can use tin and
you can manufacture this at scale. You
can keep goods fresh for a long period
of time. It's durable. And again, it's
in this easy to manufacture fixed
quantity size. You then get card stock.
This enables real consumer package goods
like cereal, cracker boxes, you know,
that's still most food today
>> or most food sold in supermarkets.
>> Yes. All containers really move from
bespoke one-off containers to
massmanufactured quantifiable fixed
sizes. By 1900, 1/5if of all US
manufacturing is packaged food. That is
how significant the shift is.
>> This is the rise of the great CPG
companies on the product supplier side
of the supermarket market.
>> Yeah, consumer package goods. That's
exactly right. And in 1916, the real
break from the general store of old
happens. A guy named Clarence Saunders
launches a store where, thanks to
packaged and branded products, you no
longer need an associate for help. So
consumers can actually go and touch the
products for themselves instead of
asking the man behind the counter to get
it for you, which was complete heresy at
the time. And it is the way that all
stores work now.
>> Just like the convenience store
innovation. Yes. Equally obvious today
and equally wild back then.
>> Yes. And that store that Clarence
Saunders started was Piggly Wiggly.
>> That's right.
>> With 500 stores today. So David, you
mentioned CPG, the sort of cousin of the
supermarket. These two entangled
characters in our story, the rise of the
supermarket and the rise of the consumer
package good. What role does that play
in the development of the grocery store?
>> Proctor and Gamble, Unilver,
>> Kelloggs, Gillette, CocaCola, Nestle,
note, all companies and products that
you're not going to find in Trader Joe's
today.
>> Not today. Yeah. So, once you get this
scale of packaging and consistency of
products, you've basically paved the way
for food brands to emerge. You can start
to promise quality to customers in a way
that was previously reserved for the
merchant. You used to trust the store
owner, not the granola maker. And now
the maker of granola can take on this
new job to be done, which is taking a
heterogeneous amount of natural
products. Remember, like we were talking
about with milk or grains or any of
these fruits, vegetables that turn into
a CPG thing. They are at one point
natural products. And then putting them
through some sort of manufacturing
process to come out the other side as
one predictable, promised, homogeneous
product. standardized, nationally
available product. Yep.
>> Yes. That lives up to a brand promise of
whatever it is. It's probably quality,
but it's probably other things, too. You
start to get companies like the National
Biscuit Company realizing, well, we
should lean into this.
>> Oh, boy. That sounds like Nabiscoco,
doesn't it? It
>> is. So, you get them for the very first
time slapping Nabiscoco on a cardboard
box. So this is a profound change for
the entire value chain where the trust
is now with the brand not with the
retailer and retailers basically are
shifting to serve as a vessel just to
sell these trusted branded products.
Once brands these producers of product
realize this power and realize oh my god
it's all shifted to us now they press
this advantage. So they start
advertising. First you get newspaper and
magazine and then radio and then the
most perfect instantiation
>> you could ever ask for a brand
>> television. The idea that you could
build trust with consumers through
sight, sound, and motion beamed over the
air into everyone's homes in the 1950s
and60s. It's nirvana for this whole
ecosystem to kind of come together. And
the net of all this for Joe and Trader
Joe's and being about to get into this
market is that supermarkets basically
become real estate companies. This is
something I had no idea about until
doing this research. They essentially
stop having their core competency be the
taste and opinion of a merchant. They
used to be in this great business where
they would choose what to stock and then
they would be the source of trust. And
now consumers are just saying, "Hey, you
need to have these things. Hey, I'm here
for the Cheerios,
>> right? You say you need Cheerios, I'll
go try and get Cheerio." Oh, we're just
getting whiplashed around as a
commodity.
>> And that makes it sound bad, but
actually they do become real estate
companies. They become scaled real
estate companies. and they offload a lot
of the merchandising operations to the
brands. For a lot of items, the grocery
store employees don't stock the shelves.
The brands, the CPG companies, come in
with their employees and stock the
shelves. It's crazy if you walk into a
largecale traditional supermarket today,
how many quote unquote employees of the
store are actually representatives of
the producer, the brand, or more likely
the distributor because the brands
aren't going to directly show up to
those stores. Yeah,
>> it's funny. When I finished reading
Joe's book, one of the takeaways was it
seems like if you can master a
negotiating real estate leases, two
regulatory stuff, like if you can figure
out regulatory arbitrage, and three, if
you can figure out how to not have your
employees and customers steal from you,
then you're going to run a good grocery
store. That's actually the core of this
industry is those three things. Now, of
course, there's way more to it, and
those way more things are the things you
kind of want the business to be, but
it's shocking how much of the bedrock of
just not losing money comes down to your
real estate leases not getting stolen
from and understanding the regulatory
environment you exist in and not running
a foul of it.
>> Yep. So, back to Joe and his pronto
dilemma and what's going to become
Trader Joe's here. The hard liquor thing
was a competitive response to 7-Eleven.
Turns out it's also a great competitive
response to supermarkets. So, after a
year or two of stabilizing the ship,
Joe's ambitious. He wants to do more
than just hard liquor. And he realizes
that this state of play in the
supermarket industry between the big
brands and the supermarkets who have
essentially become real estate companies
actually has created a wide open vacuum
for a new different kind of grosser to
come in and actually return to
merchandising and product knowledge.
Yes. So, as the legend goes, in the
late60s, he's hit by two simultaneous
bolts of inspiration. The first is an
article that he reads in Scientific
American that states that starting with
the GI Bill after World War II, the rate
of college education in America went
from 2% of high school graduates to 60%
of high school graduates by 1964 thanks
to the GI Bill. Basically, in America,
it went from nobody went to college
after high school except the very
privileged elite to 60% of high school
graduates now go to college. There's a
massive demographic change in America.
>> And it's not just that everyone gets
educated when they're in college. They
sort of become more aware of the world.
>> Yes. So that leads into the second bolt
of inspiration that he has from another
article he reads this time in the Wall
Street Journal, which is that Boeing,
>> oh yes,
>> the aircraft company is going to be
launching the 747
commercially and that it would
dramatically reduce the cost of
international overseas travel and make
it accessible to the average American.
>> So the stat on this is insane. The 747
immediately cut the cost of
international travel to Europe by 50%.
And within 10 years, the real cost of
traveling to Europe was cut by a factor
of 15. Wow. So you go from this insane
thing where 80% of Americans in 1965 had
not ever set foot on a plane to suddenly
it going down by 15x to get to Europe.
Americans are about to be welltraveled
>> and well educated. And in Joe's mind,
>> these two pieces of information from
these two articles coales into this
massive epiphany that he has about the
future of the American public. He writes
in the book, 7-Eleven and the whole
convenience store genre served only the
most basic needs of the most mindless
demographics with cigarettes, Coca-Cola,
milk, Budweiser, candy, bread, and eggs.
Dimly, I saw an opportunity to
differentiate ourselves radically from
mainstream retailing to mainstream
people.
>> I mean, this is it. This is the core
insight. You hit me with a quote, I'm
hitting you with a quote. This is from
The Secret Life of Groceries. Back in
1970, trader Joe Colomme looked at the
grocery industry and saw two paths. The
first required becoming an active
retailer, which for him meant rejecting
a passive role as a supermarket landlord
and applying an intensive effort to seek
out or create quote discontinuous
products that could not be imitated by
competitors. The second was to grow big,
sell goods that are available in
infinite supply. Remind you of the
Everything Store.
>> Yep. and compete ruthlessly on price.
This latter path was essentially what
every single one of his competitors was
attempting. They would spend the next
decade scaling up to carry bigger and
bigger inventories, gobbling up larger
and larger warehouse spaces, forever
looking over their shoulders at
competitors and trying to shave down
costs. He saw his own ruin there. The
biggest chain in the world would always
win. And however many competed, there
would only be one or two that survived
to the end. That's it. It's this
realization that look, I don't think I'm
going to eventually be Walmart if I'm
not going to be Walmart or Kroger or
Albertson's or, you know, one of the big
giant quote unquote winners.
>> Let's go in the extreme other direction,
right?
>> And oh, by the way, there are these two
intertwined massive demographic trends
that are starting with the young people
coming out of college and are soon going
to become the whole country that are in
my favor. But the thing that's not
obvious that takes a Joe Culum to like
figure out is how is it that
wellraveled, well educated people are
going to let you take a non-traditional
path in grocery. This is the genius
insight of the thing that he delivered
that we didn't know that we needed. You
know, it's like Steve Jobs giving us the
iPod and we didn't all know that we
needed that thing. Why is it that
welltraveled, well-educated people
needed a divergent grocery store?
>> Yes. And this is also where it's so
crazy path dependent. At this time in
the late 1960s, early 1970s,
the best way to target these types of
consumers that differentiates them from
other mass market consumers, the best
way to do so is their alcohol
consumption preferences. Like, it
couldn't be more perfect. He's already a
liquor store.
>> It's so true. I didn't realize how
important basically being a liquor store
was to the Trader Joe's story. The rest
of Trader Joe's kind of falls out of
selling liquor.
>> Yes. So, at the time in the late '60s,
early '7s, there was a sharp divide
along these lines in the country.
Bluecollar Americans drank beer.
Educated Americans drank cocktails and
spirits and soon to be wine thanks to
Trader Joe's.
>> Fascinating.
>> It was the mark of sophistication back
then. So Joe decides that his store, the
newly survived Pronto Markets, should
create a new tagline designed for this
target new customer base. The world's
largest assortment of alcoholic
beverages, which becomes 100 different
brands of scotch, 70 different brands of
bourbon, 50 different brands of rum, and
so on and so on and so on. You weren't
kidding when you said it could have
easily become a Bevmo or Total Wine.
>> Absolutely. So, he knows this is a
wholly different unique retail concept
versus Pronto. He needs a new name
because this is a new store. So, in
another almost completely foreign thing
to today,
the culture back then, especially Joe's
target market of educated, soon-to-be
traveled folks, was completely obsessed
in America with a fad known as tiki
culture. Yes. And it was inspired by
what people, you know, Americans who
were about to be able to travel, but
hereto had not actually traveled around
the world thought that Polynesia and
South Pacific culture was like
>> and you know there's like movies there's
the James Bond movies.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I started with the South
Pacific movie and it bled into cocktails
into drinks. drinks like the M Thai.
These like South Pacific Caribbean was a
bit of a version of this drinks were
super popular among this educated class
of people. If you go to Disney World,
you can still see some vestigages of
this. There's the Polynesian Resort,
>> the Dole Whip and the um what's the
bird? Um, remember Nolan Bushnell told
us on the Atari episode that he was
inspired by all the animatronic birds,
which is right next to the Dole Whip
Stand and not too far over is the Jungle
Cruise. And Joe Colom says the Jungle
Cruise was one of his two inspirations
for embracing this trader idea, this
tiki trader thing. The other of which is
a book that he was reading called White
Shadows in the South Seas. And when you
look at it, the cover is like evocative
of this. We'll put it in the email
newsletter. It's very Trader Joe's
looking.
>> And then the final piece of this sort of
branding stew in Joe's mind is that one
of the cornerstone cultural elements of
tiki culture were these two competing
restaurant chains that scaled across
America in cities across America.
>> Oh, Trader Vicks. Don the Beach Comr was
the first one
>> and then their competitor Trader Vicks
and they were these tiki themed
restaurants. And so
>> borrowing from Trader Vicks along with
all this other influence and Disney
World and Hollywood and movies and
books, Joe gets the idea.
>> It should feel like Traers on the high
seas. It should have a maritime element
and a tiki trader element. and we're
going to call it Trader Joe's
>> too. Perfect.
>> So, in August 1967,
Joe opens the first Trader Joe's on a
Royo Parkway in Pasadena, California.
Joe decides that Pasadena is the perfect
first target market because Caltech and
a whole bunch of universities are there.
You got professors, you got graduates
coming out.
>> And was this one of the pronto markets
before? Was he in the same real estate?
No, this is a new store.
>> Ah,
>> and when it opens August 1967, it's got
a lot of the elements of Trader Joe's
today. Employees are called crew
members. Store manager is a captain.
There's the assistant manager, first
mate. The employees all wear Hawaiian
shirts. And it's got a new strategy. But
before we talk about what that new
strategy is,
>> yes, we want to thank one of our
favorite companies, Shopify. Okay,
David, I had an idea for this one. I
want to take listeners on a tour of my
house and point out some of the products
that I own from businesses built on
Shopify. Are you game?
>> This is awesome. You referenced this on
our last read. This is great. Let's go.
>> All right. So, upstairs I'm sleeping on
Brooklyn Sheets and parachute pillows,
all from founders that built amazing
businesses on Shopify. My wife's jewelry
collection includes pieces from At
Present. That's the company that our
friend Mark Bridge started.
>> Of course. Shout out Mark.
>> Yep. Thanks on the Rolex episode. And in
my closet, marine layer. Got some
Rothies and of course Warby Parker. All
built on Shopify.
>> That is uh quite the entrepreneurial uh
set of items in your house there.
>> Keeps going downstairs and in the
kitchen. There's of course dandelion
chocolate, athletic brewing, and a few
phony Negronis in the fridge.
>> Delicious.
>> My coffee mug right here is from Mir. I
love how light these uh stainless steel
mugs are. And I've got a Kodapaxi bag by
the door over there. Another amazing
founder story built on Shopify. And then
here's one that surprised me. In my
toddler's playroom, we've got Hot Wheels
and FisherPrice because Mattel runs
their online stores on Shopify. That
might be my favorite big Shopify
customer because I guess that means
Barbie runs on Shopify, too, since it's
part of Mattel, which means a huge part
of my house with my four-year-old girl
also runs on Shopify.
>> Yes, I was wondering. And listeners,
it's not just creator brands or small
startups. David, those books on the
shelf behind you from Penguin
Publishing, they sell through Shopify.
The New York Times store, Shopify.
>> Yeah. And get this, my old house had an
air conditioner from Carrier, a
110-year-old public company that also
sells on Shopify.
>> Yeah. Basically invented air
conditioning. Amazing story. Sells on
Shopify. It is Breakout Founders and the
biggest enterprises that are powered by
Shopify today.
>> Yes. And for these smaller niche brands,
Shopify obviously is everywhere. That
purple shop pay button at checkout has
become so trustworthy and so insanely
easy to buy things you want. And for the
bigger enterprise brands, it's proof
that Shopify isn't just for startups.
They power some of the largest and most
established retailers in the world. So
if you run a business, whether you're
just starting out or operating at global
scale, Shopify is the platform built for
you. Head to shopify.com/acquired.
That's shify.com/acquired
and just tell them that Ben and David
sent you.
>> All right. So David, what is
strategically different? What are the
choices that Joe made when he opened
that first Trader Joe's in Pasadena?
Other than of course putting everyone in
Hawaiian shirts.
>> So the first obviously is the target
market like we just talked about. You
know these newly educated college grads
who are about to travel the world. Joe
has his sort of folksy shorthand for
this in the book of the overeducated and
underpaid.
>> Yes. It's interesting at this point it's
not branded products really the way that
Trader Joe's is today. It's just a
convenience/g grocery store that happens
to target people who value authenticity,
quality, sophistication, but also want
affordability. It's sort of this early
career postgrad type of person. So, it's
near college campuses. It's near large
hospitals. Interestingly, it's also near
retirees.
>> Yes.
>> Because retirees sort of behave
similarly to younger prefamily folks.
This is the dual pillars of Trader Joe's
target customers. It's young
professionals starting out and retirees.
>> Yes, it's funny. The retirees also very
value focused and uh large consumers of
liquor, candy, high-fiber foods,
vitamins. It's a big profit center. A
thing that they do here to sort of play
into the overeducated or I would say
highly educated, underpaid is the
Victorian art with the sort of cheesy
humorous captions. They adopt this as
their visual identity. It's a double
win. It plays off this educated customer
base where they can make jokes. Like if
you go by the is it the guacamole that
they call avocado's number as a play on
Avoadro's number? Yes.
>> In is that chemistry?
>> I think so. or they used to have the Sir
Isaac Newton's of course, but two,
Victorian imagery is royaltyfree.
Anything before 1906 is public domain.
So this is just Joe being cheap. All the
packaging is just ripping off these old
royaltyfree images.
>> That's Trader Joe's right there.
>> It's amazing. And so he really comes up
with this thing he calls the four tests,
which is one, we want to stock goods
that are high value per cubic inch.
>> Yes. That starts of course with liquor
as we talked about.
>> Yes. And then of course vitamins and you
walk into a Trader Joe's today, you can
almost feel that it's stocked with
things that are high value density. Even
though the goods aren't expensive, the
way it's all jammed into the store, it
feels dense.
>> Yes. And Trader Joe's today average
about call it 15,000ish, maybe a little
less square feet per store. The average
supermarket is like 50,000 square feet.
And the average Walmart is like 150,000
square feet.
>> And back then, Trader Joe's was like
4,000 square feet. I mean, these were
tiny stores, so they needed high value
density in them.
>> Or I'm going to come back to that in a
minute. He wanted them to be 4,000
square feet.
>> Two, high rate of consumption. You want
customers coming back over and over
again.
>> Vitamins.
>> Three, goods that are easily handled. So
much of Trader Joe's's business stems
out of this that they are unwilling to
start doing things that are hard to
handle, that are logistically difficult.
And they kind of have this ethos of if
we can make it so people are willing to
overlook the fact that we don't have
some stuff that's hard to handle, then
great, all the better business for us if
we can keep customers coming back and we
only have to deal with easily handleable
goods. And then the fourth is probably
the most important something that Trader
Joe's can be outstanding in terms of
price or assortment.
>> Yes, this is the counterpositioning.
This is how can we be different than
what every other player in the market is
doing. So, this last strategic tenant
is, I think, most perfectly
perhaps in Trader Joe's entire history,
exemplified in the first new product
category that they add beyond liquor to
this official new first Trader Joe's
store. You mentioned a minute ago that
Joe's target square footage size for the
new Trader Joe's store concept was like
4,4500
square ft.
>> Y
>> the first location on a Royo in
Pasadena, even though it's small today,
was actually about twice that size. It
was like 7 or 8,000 square ft. Not by
design. We want to be in Pasadena.
That's the perfect first market. I'm
willing to trade off having a bigger
store than I would actually like.
>> And he was meticulous about location
picking. It wasn't just let's look at
some census data and figure out incomes.
I mean, it was the soft factors of is
there a university close? But he would
just go drive up and down all the
neighborhoods around it and try to
figure out, hey, are these my customers?
How easy is it to access my store if I
put it on this block versus that block?
Oh, if I'm on the wrong side of a
divided highway, then I actually can't
access all the people who have to, you
know, make a left turn into traffic. It
was really this six sense for developing
what is my actual easy addressable
customer base from this store who is
going to make this store their home
spot.
>> Yep. So, they move in, got the Trader
Joe's concept with hard liquor being the
cornerstone sort of first.
>> Yeah. What was the second? Well, they
got to figure out what to do with all
this extra space. And at first, they try
bringing in a meat department, a meat
butcher as a concession, as a subtenant,
>> which they don't have now, right?
>> No, no, no. Long gone.
>> Too hard to handle.
>> Too hard to handle and not
differentiated. I mean, that's what the
supermarkets do. He's building the anti-
supermarket,
>> right?
>> And then one of the store managers in
the portfolio says, "Hey, I know this
other meat guy." Well, we're thinking
meets here. He used to have the shop
next to one of their other pronto
markets here in LA. He moved up to
Northern California to Napa County. He's
gotten to know some of the wine guys up
in Napa. Now, this is like late 60s,
early 70s. This is before California
wine in Napa is a thing,
>> which I didn't know until starting this
episode that the whole concept of Napa
is like a 60-year-old.
>> Yeah. Oh, yeah. We're going to do it. So
this manager, this captain is like,
"Well, Joe, alcohol's, you know, our
sort of core product here. What if we
try expanding into wine?" And Joe's
like, "All right, great. Let's try it."
>> Meanwhile, Joe doesn't drink wine.
>> Yeah. Yet yet.
>> Yet.
>> He would become a huge anophile. Onile.
How do you pronounce it?
>> I have no idea. I
>> think it's like o e n o p h i l e. The
wine lover. Onafile.
>> Learn something new every day.
>> Yeah. So, just like, great, let's try
it. They use a whole bunch of that extra
space that they have in the Aoyo
Boulevard store, and they install the
quote unquote world's greatest variety
of California wine right there in the
Trader Joe's store. And the world's
greatest variety was
17 different kinds of wine from
different wineries in Napa.
>> 17.
>> Now, the crazy thing,
>> that's so funny. I actually think
there's a pretty good chance that this
was the world's greatest variety of
California wine in one retailer
because it wasn't a market yet.
Americans were not yet drinking wine,
let alone Napa wine or Snowoma wine.
It's Trader Joe's that makes it a thing.
>> Wow.
>> Because by God, it becomes a huge hit,
as you could imagine, with the Trader
Joe's target demographic. I mean, what
more sophisticated worldly thing could
you offer them? I mean, it makes so much
sense in retrospect. Wine is the
ultimate non-commodity commodity.
>> Oh, yeah. There's this great line that
you can't sell wine, you have to sell
wines.
>> Yes.
>> The consumer psyche around wine is that
we are trained to believe it's this
heterogeneous product. Whereas milk,
vitamin D whole milk is vitamin D whole
milk.
>> Milk is milk.
>> It's all interchangeable. Wines aren't
that way at all.
>> They're the complete opposite side of
the spectrum.
>> Amazing thing if you're trying to be
this merchant who is selecting goods on
behalf of your customers. And your brand
promise as the merchant is just come to
my store and be delighted. And you don't
need to just say like, "Hey, I'll always
have milk for you." You say, "Come to my
store. I will pick out interesting wines
and when the wines are gone, they're
gone. So, they're small batch. They're
boutique. I'm buying however much supply
I can get of a thing that I think is
great. You can build a much better
business on being known for I will be
surprised and delighted when I come to
the store and you have selected
interesting items for me than you can on
you are an empty vessel through which to
provide me milk.
>> Yeah. or Nabiscoco or, you know,
whatever large CPG brand. It's so
perfect. And wine comes with all of
these other amazing aspects to it, too.
Drinking it makes you seem sophisticated
European. It has this rich tradition
going back for all of recorded human
history. You can spend a whole lifetime
studying it and still never come close
to learning everything about wine. high
repeat purchase, high density. I mean,
it really fits the four tests. Super
easy to handle and now a great way to be
differentiated because no one else is
doing the California wine thing. This is
new. They can build a brand around being
California wine purveyors. So, it
happened by accident that they had this
extra space that the old store manager
knew the meat guy who moved to Napa, who
knew the wine guys. But I think this
probably becomes
the most important factor in Trader
Joe's success. And they also timed it
perfectly. This is the unlock for
thinking about Trader Joe's. They are
wine merchants and they merchandise
everything in the same way you would
merchandise wine.
>> Yes. They really ask themselves this
question of could grocery be the same?
Could we actively seek out and purchase
things in small finite batches that we
think would be interesting to provide to
our customers? And would people buy in
to a store where you go and you don't
always know exactly what you're going to
get, but you can trust that the person
who found it for you found a great
treasure.
>> Yes, it's perfect. And like I said, they
nailed the timing. So this is the late
'60s, early '7s where they're starting
out becoming a California wine merchant.
American and specifically Californian
wine is about to have a rocket ship
ascendancy. If you've ever seen the
movie Bottle Shock, which came out a
couple years ago, it's about this thing
that really happened,
>> the 1976
Judgment of Paris, which is one of the
most seinal events in the history of the
wine industry. It was a blind taste test
where Parisian wine critics did blind
tasting of all the top French wines,
>> the Bordeau, the everything, all the
famous, all the old world greats
>> against Napa Valley wines
and the Napa wines trounced the top
Bordeau in like every category. And it
was this bomb that went off in the wine
industry and started the whole culture
of Napa and Sonoma and American wines
and the tourism there and the romance
>> and Trader Joe's is like a few years
into being the number one seller of the
widest variety of California wines.
>> Yes. And their target market is exactly
who is going to consume this stuff and
love it. It's so great. So the early
days of the Trader Joe's wine program
were unbelievable. Joe and all the
employees, they start learning about
wine, going up to Napa, conducting
tastings, meeting all these wine makers
who are, you know, essentially guys in
the garage at this point in time. They
bring it back to Pasadena. They get
Heights, Freark Abbey, like some of the
best wines and wine makers in the entire
world in history are being sold for 10
bucks a bottle in Trader Joe's in
Southern California. So, they start
evangelizing it to their customer base.
Like you said, meets all the tests.
Like, we're all in. In 1970, they start
publishing a free newsletter to all
their customers to educate them about
wine and update them about all the new
shipments that are coming in.
>> Do they already have the Fearless Flyer?
Is this like in addition to that?
>> This is how the Fearless Flyer starts.
>> Ah, they call it the Trader Joe's wine
insiders report.
>> And it's this whole newsletter. You
imagine you're a wine merchant. This
eventually once they get more into
grocery in 1985, this becomes the
Fearless Flyer, but it's the same
approach to it. It's merchandising. It's
telling the stories of these products
just like you would with a wine.
>> Fascinating.
>> It's incredible. No other groceryer is
doing anything like this.
>> No. So by 1970, the year they launched
the Insiders report and three years
after this first Trader Joe's launches
on a Royal Boulevard, Trader Joe's
becomes the largest wine retailer in
California,
which is on the one hand completely
insane, but on the other hand shows just
how young and new the wine drinking
market was in America and that Trader
Joe's was the one making it happen
starting in California. Yeah. And they
still have what? Singledigit stores at
this point.
>> Yeah. Pretty quickly they add imported
wine, too. So, not just domestic
California wine. They go to Europe, they
go to France, they go to Spain, they go
to Portugal, all the great wine- making
countries. H they go to Italy and they
start bringing imported wines back, too.
That also sells like wildfire. They also
do this really clever thing where fair
trade laws applied to wines as well. And
with imported wines, they didn't
actually set the minimum prices based on
the wine label. It was based on the
distributor, the importer that brought
it in to the country,
>> which makes it different than the way
that domestic products worked.
>> And multiple importers would import the
same labels and wines from Europe.
>> And so Trader Joe's is like, "Oh, this
is an arbitrage. We'll just go find
importers that are willing to set the
lowest minimum price for the wines that
they're importing and we can break the
street price from the other importers.
>> That's interesting cuz in other fair
trade categories, you'd have to go to
the entire distributed group of
producers and say, "Hey, all you know,
milk producers or all whiskey producers,
can you guys agree to lower the fair
trade price?" case and they'd all be
like, "No,
>> it was uniform across the whole
product." Yeah.
>> But in this scenario, you just have to
go to one distributor and say, "Hey,
you're importing the French wine. Can
you set the price a little lower? I want
to sell it lower."
>> Yeah. Then pretty quickly, wine
collecting starts to become a thing. And
Trader Joe's is just blowing out wine.
They're the number one retail in
California. At one point, Joe decides
he's going to set up a wine bank for his
customers. Did you read about this?
>> Yes.
>> This is awesome. He's like, "Great. How
am I going to sell more to my customers
and give them something they want, meet
their needs,
>> sell it to them, and then also sell them
a place to put it?"
>> Yes. Brilliant. Right. Trader Joe's does
not have wine banks today. It turns out
it's a bad business idea because when
couples get divorced, the first thing is
go raid the wine bank, pull out all the
wine that is now worth a lot of money,
and then the other spouse will sue the
wine bank. So, they're just like in the
middle of these divorces all the time.
>> They get dragged into all these divorce
lawsuits.
>> Brutal. But what you're starting to see
here with the ability to find clever
ways to do regulatory arbitrage or sell
below the fair trade price, Joe is a
master of reading all the regulations,
not trusting what anybody tells him of
like, "Oh, this is the way you're
supposed to do it." He's like, "Show me
the regulation." and he pours over the
regulation and he synthesizes it all
from all the different bodies whether
it's the USDA or the FTC or the state of
California or the interstate commerce
commission or just understanding the
full landscape holding it all in his
head and saying I have it I know a way
that we can provide value to customers
because his whole thing is like how do
we give people the best value possible
highv value items at low prices and do
it in a legal way and then I can market
the heck heck out of it. I can make it a
thing that people know it's just one
more great thing you'll get from coming
to Trader Joe's is one more thing that
we only have here that you can't get
anywhere else and you're going to get a
great value by doing it.
>> High value to customers in
differentiated products and wine is so
perfect. So all that takes us through
the early '7s and this sort of first era
of Trader Joe's on the back of liquor
and then wines. Yeah, this is uh what he
calls good time Charlie building this
party store.
>> Somebody needs to do the eras tour of
Trader Joe's. That'd be amazing. Bring
out the products from the different
eras. Awesome. And that leads into the
next era that Joe also sort of in goofy
fashion calls whole earth Harry. The
health food era of Trader Joe's. So, I
think you could say about Joe that he
was a genius at many, many things, just
about every critical aspect of
retailing. But I think maybe his
greatest genius
was
identifying major demographic and
cultural trends.
>> Yes.
>> That were just starting in America and
then creating the products and the
merchandising to capitalize on them. It
is astonishing
how he had his finger on the pulse and
how he was willing to either change what
Trader Joe's was or adapt it and add a
new layer on top to turn Trader Joe's
into the next version of what it needed
to be. You mentioned some attributes on
Joe himself. This is a beautiful excerpt
from Benjamin Lur's book that I think is
just the best description of him. Joe is
a man frequently described as a genius
by other very smart men. And I should
say Benjamin Laura, the guy who writing
this, very critical, very journalistic
in his approach. The whole rest of the
book is applying a lot of scrutiny to
the grocery industry. The fact that he
talks about Joe this way actually has a
lot of credibility. When asking his
employees and competitors and industry
observers about him, I hear the word
visionary so many times it becomes
worrisome. I hear he is brilliant,
incredible, wise. Grown men tell me they
are aruck, chilled, giddy in his
presence. Executives who worked for him,
stuffed seaete dullards of the
grotesqually self-confident variety,
will drop all pretense and describe
wanting to wake up early in the morning
to race to work because they can't wait
to hear what Joe has to say. They tell
me he has a photographic memory, that he
can read up to,200 words per minute,
that he adds, multiplies, or divides
lists of figures in his brain quicker
than they could ever scan them. that he
knows the names of all his employees,
their spouses names, and their dates of
hire, and their birthdays and their
wedding anniversaries. But beyond all
this awe, the steel cage memory, the
gymnastic cognitive quickness, the
genius of Joe that impresses me most is
his ability to project this integrity
and decency when he wants to. He keeps
you guessing exactly where the line lies
between calculating businessman and
wholesome self-taught founder in a way
that allows almost everyone who meets
him to underestimate his abilities yet
simultaneously afford him huge amounts
of respect. It is an awesome talent
especially in a business built on
negotiation trust and quick decisive
deals.
>> That is so awesome. I'm telling you,
this whole book is just beautiful pros,
but that's a great encapsulation. And
when you layer on top that intelligence
with that interpersonal ability and then
this thing you're talking about, David,
this seemingly ability to predict the
cultural future of where America is
heading and then build Trader Joe's as
the product for that future. It's
unbelievable.
>> Is amazing. So this whole earth Harry
era where we wrap ourselves in a blanket
of granola and health food and
almond butter and nuts and dried fruits.
So at the end of the 60s and into the
70s
the California hippie counterculture
summer of love movement kind of
bifrocated and went off in a whole bunch
of different directions. And one of
those directions was Silicon Valley and
tech and computers and Steve Jobs and
Nolan Bushnell and W and that becomes
Apple and everything.
>> They hate Ashbury.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Another one of those
directions was the organic health food
movement. And for Joe and the target
audience of overeducated, underpaid
consumers, this just like wine is right
in the sweet spot. You can merchandise
it just like wine. You can tell the
stories about what these foods are, why
they're better, why they're great for
your body. It's high value per cubic
inch. It's more expensive than regular
food. Joe has this amazing quote on
this. He says, "We prepared to marry the
health food store to the liquor store."
This concept obviously was founded in
schizophrenia, but it occurred to me
that people who really thought about
what they ingested, whether they were
wine connoisseurs or health food nuts,
were basically on the same radar beam.
Both groups were fragmented from the
masses who willingly consumed folders
coffee, Best Foods mayonnaise,
Wonderbread, Coca-Cola, etc. Both groups
were the kind of people who I was hoping
represented a breakup of mainstream
consumption in America. And so by the
spring of 1971, the caterpillar, Good
Time Charlie, had emerged from his
chrysalis as whole earth Harry, a party
store come health food store. It's
amazing. This is all happening, call it
five to eight years before John Mackey
starts Whole Foods in Austin, Texas. So,
this is how on the pulse Joe was. And
Whole Foods would obviously become the
closest substitute competitor that
Trader Joe's has out there. I mean,
they're still pretty far apart, but
yeah, it's wild. Joe sees all the things
that John would then see and create
Whole Foods and he saw them five plus
years before.
>> Yep. It's about aligning your tradeoffs.
The other amazing aligned thing about
this customer base that he's trying to
serve and the business that he's trying
to create of be this sort of anti-s
supermarket with health foods. You can
buy batches of food from suppliers that
the big chains won't or can't because
they're just not set up to do it.
>> The CPG companies are never going to
touch this stuff. At least in the 70s.
There's this amazing story of someone
comes to visit Trader Joe's saying,
"Hey, I have a whole bunch of extra-l
large eggs that I just can't sell to the
supermarket chains. Can you help me out?
>> They only want large eggs."
>> Yeah. And Joe says, "Sure. What's going
on with them?" And he says, "Well, they
only want large eggs. I'll sell you
these extra-l large eggs that are at
least 12% bigger, but for a lower price
because I can't seem to unload them."
And he's like, "Why the deal?" And the
supplier says, "Well, the large
supermarket chains only want continuous
items, and I'm actually not sure I can
regularly produce enough of these extra
large eggs." The kind of disturbing part
about this is it's because it's at the
end of the chicken's life that they
produce these extra large eggs. So, it's
kind of the last eggs they'll lay. And
unless I can promise a certain volume
and certainty that I'll be able to
supply, there's not a market for it.
>> The big supermarket industry just isn't
interested. Trader Joe's is like, "We've
got the perfect consumer for you.
They're value conscious. Our message to
them is sometimes we'll have stuff,
sometimes we won't. And so if you just
want to sell those to me, I'm sure I can
unload them on our customers. They're
going to love the deal." And then it's
actually not a big deal for me when I
run out because that's not a part of our
value proposition the way it is for the
big supermarkets. So this begins what
Joe calls intensive buying. If we have
line of sight on something that we can
uniquely sell, that we're going to get a
great deal on, that we know our
customers are going to love, we should
do all we can to go and suck up all the
supply of that thing so we can get the
lowest per unit price for our customers.
>> Yep. We'll tell the story. They'll get
it.
>> It's this storytelling. That's exactly
right. It's just like selling wines.
They really start to bring that into
foods in this era. So for this whole
Earth Harry era of Trader Joe's, these
health foods are the perfect vessel for
all this.
>> Yeah. They basically create a blacklist
of things that over the years becomes no
GMOs, no high fructose corn syrup, no
artificial flavors, no MSG, no bleached
flour, no added hormones in their dairy
products. It kind of blossoms into this
big list of you can just trust the foods
that we are giving to you as healthy in
some way. The funny thing is today most
of what you're buying from them is
processed packaged food. It's just story
told very well. And like you know you go
grab stuff in the freezer. It's a lot of
salt. There's a lot of deep fried stuff.
You can't make giant frozen meals at
this scale without being very processed.
But they have this brand that they've
built over 50 years of paying attention
to the ingredients, of doing what they
can, of looking a lot more granola
during this 1970s era. So they are able
to carry that brand with them and they
regularly update what they will and
won't stock and what they let their
suppliers put in. So there is sort of
this funny dichotomy of it being a quote
unquote health food store.
>> There have been other layers that have
been added since then.
>> Yes.
>> So it's fitting you say granola. The
really strategic critical element of
adding health foods to Trader Joe's
isn't just that it also fits all the
same criteria that wine does and that
it's a perfect fit for the Trader Joe's
target customer. All that is true. It's
different than wine in one critical
aspect. Wine by nature is branded. It's
not big brands, but it's the brand of
the winery and the label. And that
carries a huge amount of value. Health
foods, nuts, dried fruit, bran, granola.
This stuff is unbranded at the time. And
thus emerges the opportunity for Trader
Joe's to start introducing their own
product brands. But first, before we
tell the story of private label and
Trader Joe's, this is a great time to
thank good friend of the show, Sentry.
That's S N T R Y, like someone standing
guard.
>> Yes, Sentry helps developers debug
everything from errors to performance
issues and fix them before users get
mad. Specifically, David, I've started
describing it this way. You know when
you open an app and it just kind of
hangs or you click a button and then an
error pops up?
>> Yep.
>> The people making those apps need to
know about this and Sentry tells them so
you don't have to.
>> Listeners, you have almost certainly use
something today that relies on Sentry.
140,000
organizations, basically all of your
favorite apps use Sentry to run better.
>> So I asked the team for some examples.
If you're tracking a workout with tonal
sentry is there or checking your kid
into preschool with Brightwheel Sentry
or brushing up on your Spanish and Dual
Lingo or going for the win in Valerant
that is even helping to keep satellites
in space.
>> Or if I literally just read off Sentry's
website, Disney Plus, Cloudflare,
GitHub, Anthropic, Verscell, Atlassian
all use Sentry.
>> And they do more than just tell you
about the issues. It helps you figure
out how to fix them, too. Sentry now has
an AI debugging agent called Seir, which
can find the cause of even the gnarliest
issues with nearly 95% accuracy. Seir
pulls from all the context that Sentry
already has, your errors, logs, traces,
codebase, etc. to understand the root
cause, offer a fix, and get you back to
building. Their new AI code review
feature even can help you look at pull
requests and predict the bugs before you
ship them into production.
>> So awesome. So, our thanks to Sentry for
making sure that all of our favorite
stuff just works. You can check out
century.io/acquired.
That's s n t r y.io/acquired.
And just tell them that Ben and David
sent you.
>> All right. So, David,
>> private label. Let's go.
>> What was the very first Trader Joe's
private label product? Also, it's crazy
to imagine Trader Joe's without private
label,
>> right? I mean, you walk in today, you
look around, over 80% of the stuff is
Trader Joe's,
>> except wine
>> and some other things here and there.
There's RX bars. I noticed they used to
have spin drifts for a while. I don't
know if they still do.
>> Some of their cheeses.
>> Yep. But wine and spirits are the one
big category left where it's mostly not
private label, including Charles Shaw,
as we will talk about at the end of the
episode.
>> All right. So, how did they start?
>> All right. The first private label
product is naturally enough for whole
earth Harry granola.
>> Perfect.
>> And you can still buy Trader Joe's
granola today. I'm sure it's not the
same recipe.
>> And it's like kind of the easiest thing,
right? You just take in a giant
truckload of generic granola. It's not
that hard to throw it into bags.
>> And it's literally the product that is
used as the euphemism for this whole
health food category.
>> Yes.
>> Granola.
So, uh, granola quickly leads them to
private label honey, freshlysqueezed
orange juice, which they have in the
stores for a long time. They eventually
pull it out cuz it's too operationally
complex.
>> It's such a Trader Joe's thing, right?
>> Totally not easy to handle. Doesn't pass
one of the four tests. Get it out of
there.
>> Vitamins, private label, brand, and
brand flakes. And then the big one, the
wine equivalent of health foods, their
vendor there in Southern California that
they are sourcing their brand and brand
flakes from, turns out also does nuts
and dried fruits. And so Joe and Trader
Joe's on a whim, because their vendor of
brand also offered it, decided like,
hey, let's get some nuts and dried fruit
in here, too. All right, now is a great
time to eat some roasted and salted
fancy mixed nuts branded by Trader
Joe's.
>> Got any dried fruit in there, too?
>> Uh, not this package. I will say now
when you go and grab, they're not just
like commodity nuts. They have stuff
that you can't get anywhere else, like
weird chili lime blends or sesamer
crusted cashews or
>> interesting trail mixes that are not the
generic thing.
>> Yep. So, nuts and dried fruits become
the next rocket ship product category
for Trader Joe's. And just like wine in
the alcohol era, I mean, customers love
it. Still do. I mean, this has got to be
one of the biggest product categories
for Trader Joe's to this day.
>> Yep.
>> Certainly in terms of space that I see
in the stores. You know, the nut and
dried fruit section is huge. Just like
with wine, Trader Joe's quickly becomes
the largest nut and dried fruit retailer
in the whole state of California. And
it's all either unbranded or Trader
Joe's private label products that
they're selling. Incredible. Also very
high value per cubic inch as high or
higher than wine. And just everything
about it is great for Trader Joe's
business model. It's yet another thing
where they're not carving off a piece of
themsel and giving it to a brand.
They're saying, "Nope, this is a Trader
Joe's thing." And when people come in
here, they have a relationship with us,
that we're not this vessel for other
people. We're now slowly getting to make
100% of the brand promise and the
experience of Trader Joe's be our stores
with our items in it and all of our
operations. There is no greater example
of the difference between the
supermarket CPG brand industrial unholy
alliance versus the Trader Joe's
approach than nuts. What is the one CPG
brand at this time that sells nuts?
>> Planters.
>> Planters. Compare that. It's the same
nuts. A nut is a nut.
But what is the brand promise and
product experience and job to be done by
planters versus the nuts and dried fruit
that you're buying at Whole Earth Harry
Trader Joe's? Polar universe opposites.
>> It's funny if I'm eating the same thing
of mixed nuts that are salted from
planters. It feels like I should be
drinking it with a beer and watching
football.
>> And it's like bad for you.
>> And it feels like if I'm eating it out
of this bag that I just ate the exact
same nuts out of, right? with this
hippie dippy little basket that shows
some like roots and a sunshine on the
bag. And this makes me feel good.
>> This is health food.
>> You're being discerning about what
you're putting in your body.
>> So funny.
>> It's the same nuts.
>> So once they realize this, I mean, they
really just start moving product
category by product category. Obviously,
Trader Joe's is not getting into the
business of making these products
themselves, but what they are doing is
finding people that currently make
something and working with them to make
something slightly different, almost
always slightly different, putting it in
Trader Joe's packaging that is in some
way unique. It's kind of like what
Costco does. They want a unique skew for
Costco, so you're never price comparing
it against something else. Like I
remember my classic example at Costco
was I went and bought a Sonic Air at
Costco, but it turns out the way it was
packaged, it came with different
accessories. So there was no apples to
apples with the Sonicare that I was
buying elsewhere. This takes it one step
further. They're saying for most of
these items, there is no equivalent
somewhere else. Yeah, there's a few like
the pretzel fins, but a lot of these
things is a different set of spices, one
or two more or less ingredients in the
pre-made meal, or maybe Trader Joe's
merchandisers are collaborating with a
supplier to create a meal from scratch
based on their market intelligence and
insights about what consumers want.
Trader Joe's is actually making almost
none of this, but they are integrating
up the supply chain in a way where they
can say, "Hey, we need a Trader Joe's
unique product that you are making just
for us." And by the way, you will never
tell a damn soul that you are the one
who makes it. My uh favorite example of
this, obviously not from the health food
era of Trader Joe's, was that there was
a period of time, it may still be the
case, that Wolf Gang Pucks made the
frozen pizzas for Trader Joe's. But this
illustrates the concept of we got to
deliver unique and compelling value for
our customers. It's a Wolf Gang Puck
frozen pizza. You can go buy it in a
supermarket. The Trader Joe's version is
smaller in diameter so that it fits in a
toaster oven. Ah, there you go.
Compelling convenience value for our
customers. You don't have to turn on
your whole bake oven to make this pizza.
>> And also, I would bet that it also is
just cheaper by getting rid of the brand
and thus getting rid of the brand's need
to market and have overhead costs in
marketing. They just eliminate some of
the waste in the system and pass that
along to their customers. So you're
always getting a little bit of a better
value in addition to a little bit of a
unique product.
>> Oh, totally. One thing we didn't talk
about in the description of the brand
supermarket industrial complex is how
much of the totality of marketing is
falling on the brands in this world.
It's not just the national advertising
on television. It's the couponing.
What is the definitive experience at
least in the until recent past of the
modern American supermarket? You go in
with your wad of coupons that you got
from the circular. Who's paying for
those coupons? It's not the supermarket.
It's the manufacturers.
>> And then you get into all the dirty
stuff around like slotting fees. Did you
read at all about this?
>> Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Totally.
>> It's so extractive. the brands have to
pay money to the supermarkets just for
the right to put their products on the
shelves.
>> And then even in modern days, it's hey,
we've got instore signage. We've got
instore TV screens. They call it retail
media. You should pay us to advertise in
the store at the point of sale. Trader
Joe's is like, let's just eliminate all
of that. The brand is just our brand. If
you make the food for us, we will pay
you for that. But it's our brand. You
don't have to pay in marketing costs. So
you don't have to pay the slotting fees
to get on our shelves. We don't have
retail media in our stores. The whole
thing is about just compressing all of
the margin out of all the activities
that need to happen in the traditional
system for this streamlined system.
>> And in Joe's mind, and I think even
through the next generations of Trader
Joe's CEOs and all the way up through
the company today, that practice of the
supermarket CPG industrial complex is
just like gross. It's just disgusting.
It's like morally repugnant to them.
Like I genuinely think they feel that
way. And it's another take on the same
thing that Costco and Salt Price and Jim
Synagle had about why they don't do
sales and Trader Joe's also doesn't do
sales and doesn't have coupons. It's
like you're insulting your customers.
You're pitching to them as if this is
this discounting great thing and benefit
for them. But actually, it's the result
of this highly pernicious system that
inflates costs across the board for
them,
>> right? It's a privileged position to be
in though where you're lobbing bombs.
probably somebody has to have a 50,000
skew store. I mean, Trader Joe's and
Costco both only stock about 4,000 items
at a time. It's a better business to be
in. It's a more pleasant business to get
to run. It's a better business to work
in. And at the end of the day, there
probably also is going to be a much
larger market for a system that exists
the other way to sell all these branded
products.
>> There's a reason that uh Walmart and
Kroger and
>> they're all much bigger businesses.
>> Exactly. So, while we're on branded
products, this is a great little tidbit.
Either the website submitted a FOYA
request to the US government to the USDA
and the FDA.
>> Oh, I remember this. This is awesome.
>> To figure out via food recalls who makes
Trader Joe's items and by the Freedom of
Information Act, they have to provide
that information. And so there's a whole
bunch of these on the internet where you
can actually see the Trader Joe's pita
chips are made by Stacy's, which is
Fredo Lelay Pepsi. The yogurt is Dan and
Stonyfield Farm. Tasty Bite makes a lot
of Trader Joe's Indian food. The uh
Tasty Bite Punjab eggplant ran $339 at
Whole Foods. And the seemingly identical
or very similar is a whole dollar
cheaper. So even for these ones that are
like extremely similar, by cutting out
the brand, by buying a mass quantity of
it, and by eliminating all these
slotting fees and retail media, you
really knock a huge amount. I mean, a
dollar off of a 339 price is a huge
percentage.
>> Yeah.
>> Trader Joe's smoothies are very likely
the same or very similar as Naked Juice,
plus or minus one or two ingredients.
The hummus is very likely tribe hummus.
The whole thing is great. So the health
food era really has two huge strategic
impacts on Trader Joe's. It's getting
them into private label which you know
becomes cornerstone of the company all
the way to this day. The other equally
important thing is it diversifies them
out of wine and liquor as their sole
core differentiated thing for their
target customers. which is hugely
important because right as health food
is really ramping up and hitting its
stride in 1977, California repeals the
fair trade laws on alcohol and nearly
everything else which means that any
retailer can now price wine and alcohol
at any price they want. And this leads
to all the alcohol discounters coming
in.
>> Total wine and
>> Bevmo and etc etc etc. Now of course
Trader Joe's is still in a great
position and still does great but all of
a sudden they had this category
basically all to themselves
>> with a regulatory pseudo monopoly on it
or at least a scarce number of
>> Yeah. Right. A price regulated monopoly
you know set profit margins but now
you've got Bevmo showing up now you've
got Total Wine. You've got discounters,
dedicated big box liquor stores that can
just blow it out on prices and becomes a
big competitive vector for Trader Joe's.
And this plays out most viscerally in
wine and liquor. But it's everything
across the board. Every product they
sell now that fair trade is gone. Profit
margins just start getting eroded in
basically every category. So this is
like a big big strategic challenge not
just for Trader Joe's but for every
retailer in the industry
>> and with deregulation like this it's
good for consumers because prices are
going to drop in some ways it's good to
be a retailer because now you have more
control. You can move prices up and down
when before you were prohibited from
doing so. It's bad because you're
guaranteed profit margin is going away.
But what it does do is it shifts the
entire competitive playing field to how
good are you at your operations? How
tight are you at running your business,
controlling your costs, accounting for
everything, and understanding all the
impacts now that your profit margins are
shrinking of things that ripple through
your business?
>> Yes. And Trader Joe's certainly does do
all of those things coming out of this.
However, what you just said is true for
the majority of retailers out there.
But if you could somehow find a way to
make the majority of what you sell or
maybe even eventually everything you
sell truly differentiated
oneofone
products.
Well then you would be insulated from
this price competition. Have no direct
competitors.
And man, it's really nice that Trader
Joe's has just built up this private
label expertise in the health food
market.
>> Yep.
>> So Joe decides, all right, end of fair
trade and deregulation. I don't want to
underell. This is a massive title wave
that hits the industry. Retailers go out
of business left and right. And Trader
Joe's is not immune from this either.
People think the company is going to go
under. like employees think the company
is going to go under just like everyone
else. Joe says our way out is of course
operational excellence
>> but really in the long run it's we got
to differentiate and be one of one in
everything.
>> So he calls this phase of the company
Mac the knife which this is really
obscure is Mac the knife like the song
Mac the knife from three penny opera.
>> That's funny. I had no idea where that
came from. Joe writes in the book,
"Friends, Mac the knife has no
competition. That's why I called it Mac
the knife. My years at Pronto Markets
convinced me that where there is no
competition today, there will be
tomorrow. You must assume that
competitors will open all around you.
The answer is to design a store that has
no competition. After 1978, after the
end of fair trade, I paid no heed to
nearby supermarkets, liquor stores,
health food stores, or anything else.
The whole strategy becomes double down
on private label, double down on
differentiation, become one of one.
Become one of one. I love it. Obviously,
I love it because this is how you and I
think about acquired. Trader Joe's is a
very looking in a mirror of the type of
business we hope to build. And so I
think all of this is preaching to the
choir. How can you be more niche but
serve the [__] out of your niche? How
can you provide an incredible amount of
value to your core customer base and not
care about anybody outside your customer
target? How can you be n of one? How can
you provide only the most unique thing?
I can't decide if these are just the
best principles to run a business or if
these are just the ones that happen to
appeal to us almost as an act of vanity.
It's probably not the best way to run a
scale business, but it's an amazing way
to dominate a niche.
>> Well, yes, I think that's true. And if
you can somehow find a scale business
that you can run with these properties,
>> it's amazing.
>> That's when you get the Apples, the
Costos, the Trader Joe's,
>> right? Having no competition is a nice
>> It's a nice thing. So heading into this
Mac the knife era, Joe institutes a rule
that I assume is still in effect at
Trader Joe's to this day, which is that
okay everybody, obviously private label,
that's the strategy that's for the
future here. But Trader Joe's will never
introduce any private label product just
for the sake of having a private label
product in that category.
>> Which is the opposite of most of these
generic like you go to Walmart, the
Great Value brand is a crappier version
of the exact same branded product, but
it's price less. So,
>> exactly. Trader Joe's private label
products must be differentiated on some
dimension. And that doesn't necessarily
have to be the item itself, like we
talked about with Wolf Gang Puck Pizza,
etc. It could be the packaging, it could
be the price, it could be the
merchandising, but you must have a
differentiating factor. And yeah, Ben,
like you said, this is the polar
opposite of the private label strategy
at all the big supermarkets. For them,
it's like same product.
>> Are Amazon Basics batteries
differentiated? No, they're just
cheaper.
>> Yes. Also, it's kind of interesting that
Walmart has Great Value, Target has Good
and Gather, Amazon has Basics, Costco
has Kirkland Signature, Trader Joe's has
Trader Joe's. How come nobody else's
house brand is just the name of the
retailer? I think actually it exposes
that Trader Joe's is allin.
>> Yeah.
>> Whereas these other brands sort of want
to play both sides. We've got a house
brand, but we also work great with third
parties. Trader Joe's is like the Trader
Joe's experience is walking into our
store that is called Trader Joe's and
buying our products that are called
Trader Joe's and everything around it is
just wrapped in a big Trader Joe's
blanket and you couldn't possibly
decouple the two and I don't think other
retailers feel that way. Yes, this is
all to the point of it's doing a totally
different job at the other retailers.
The other retailers want to use the
house brand brand name to signal to
customers, this is the same product at a
cheaper price.
>> Yes.
>> Trader Joe's wants to signal to
customers with all of their products,
this is an N of one product.
>> Yep. And it's almost always true. These
pretzels I'm eating with the peanut
butter inside, I'm pretty sure there's a
Costco equivalent of these. But a lot of
the things are truly unique.
>> Yeah. Well, we'll get into after Joe's
era how Trader Joe's changes a bit as it
scales.
>> Yes.
>> But for now, this is like core core
tenants here. A great one that started
during the health food era, but then
becomes so emblematic of this is Trader
Joe's basically invented packaged almond
butter.
>> Yes,
>> almond butter wasn't a thing.
>> I couldn't believe this. Almond butter
is one of my favorite foods in the
world. I eat it every day just like I
eat a spinach fetter wrap. It is like a
part of my identity is almond butter.
And reading this book and realizing that
Trader Joe's invented it is like the
coolest thing.
>> Yes. Almond processing leaves lots of
leftover little almond bits that are
almonds but are just little bits of
almonds. And there's actually a
different technological process that you
need to then turn that into butter
versus what you need to use for bits of
peanuts to turn into peanut butter. So
none of the big brands did this even
though peanut butter was this staple CPG
good in America.
>> Peanuts are also way cheaper to source
than almonds. So you have to be willing
to mark up your almond butter or maybe
use exclusively waste products like all
the bits to make it.
>> Exactly. But the big CPG companies
almonds aren't a big part of what
they're doing back in these days.
>> Right at this point.
>> So Trader Joe's goes and learns the
process and the technology of how to do
this. finds suppliers that are willing
to do it and brings packaged almond
butter to store shelves in grocery
stores for the first time.
>> Yep.
>> And the secret weapon to really making
all this work was the fearless flyer.
And back to the wine merchandising
strategy.
>> They had the direct channel to their
customers to tell long for stories and
merchandise these products and make them
n of one. It's a physical newsletter and
it's all about the product stories of
these products that they're bringing to
market.
>> It only comes I don't know if it's four
times a year, six times a year, but
there's some scarcity to it, so you
actually kind of pay attention when you
get it. There's also a funny thing where
at first Joe was resistant to doing it
for two reasons. One, it was really
expensive to publish your own newspaper.
You'd have to work with a real publisher
printer sort of thing at type setter.
And two, you don't want to be in the
business of asking all these customers
for their address and then maintaining
PII on them and tracking them when they
move. And so that one is great because
Joe just realized, well, actually, if
I'm so good at targeting neighborhoods
that have disposable income and are
highly educated, like I have a very
particular sense of who my customer is,
if they move, the person that moves into
their house is probably also going to be
my customer.
>> Yes. So, I can just do zip code
targeting.
>> And so, he's like, "This is great. We'll
just mail them out to everybody in the
area around the store that I want to
serve." And then for the first one, this
is amazing. The the timing of this is
right around the time that the original
Mac is released. And so, he was doing
the Fearless Flyer himself.
>> Yes.
>> Using desktop publishing software on the
original Macintosh. And I will say when
you pull up the Fearless Flyer, you can
kind of tell it looks like one of these
amateurishly laidout desktop publishing
software publications,
>> which today is part of the charm, but
yeah, was done by Joe himself back in
the day.
>> As is the goofy tagline that is very
Trader Joe's in their sense of humor of
terrible dad jokes and puns. Trader
Joe's Fearless Flyer. As always, free
and worth every penny.
Yes. So, this leads into, as far as I
know, the one only other marketing
advertising activity that Trader Joe's
does.
>> Oh, on the radio.
>> Yeah. Radio. And I believe Yeah. The
only paid one, which also starts as an
organic free thing.
>> Yes.
>> Radio advertising. So the classical
music radio station in LA
>> which again target customer educated and
underpaid
>> asks Joe to come on once a week. This is
especially during the wine era of Trader
Joe's and uh do a one minute segment on
on wine that they're bringing to town.
And of course Joe's like amazing I'm
going to do that. And then it broadens
out to food. And it works so well that
they eventually decide, hey, we should
actually do this as paid radio
advertising. But unlike everybody else
who advertises on the radio, these
aren't going to be generic ads. It's
going to be Joe written himself speaking
himself telling the product story of one
singular product in every ad. And we're
always going to end with, "Thank you for
listening."
>> I love it. It's a non-advertisement
advertisement. Joe basically discovered
the power of podcasts to reach your
audience back in the 1970s.
>> They realized they should actually go
pretty hard into this and in order to
justify all the radio ad spend, they
needed a density of stores in a certain
area. And so when they were going to
launch a new city, they would have to
make sure they had sufficient number of
stores to amortize buying radio ads for
all the different areas it was going to
reach,
>> right? Cuz it's going to reach the whole
city,
>> right? They wouldn't just launch one
store. They would go into a city and
launch several at a time so you can get
the economies of scale of that. There is
one other place that they did paid
marketing.
>> Do you know what it is?
>> I don't know that I found this.
>> Donations to the arts.
>> Ah, yes. Yes.
>> Again, on this theme of the uh highly
educated and trying to reach them where
they are, they would do things like go
to plays or go to the ballet, make
donations, appear in the play bill, in
the pamphlet and the magazine.
>> Yeah. My wife Jenny, who's a executive
at the ballet here in San Francisco,
will be very mad at me if I don't
underscore for everyone listening that
supporting the arts is a great effective
form of marketing for your company
>> because it is also taxdeductible.
>> Also taxdeductible and for Trader Joe's
reaching exactly your target audience.
>> Yep.
>> So coming out of that mid70s
whole earth Harry health food era of
Trader Joe's, it really was these two
huge strategic things for the company.
One was diversifying them out of just
wine and liquor into a another new
product category that they could be
really differentiated in. And then the
bigger one of just getting them into
this private label strategy as a whole
>> that they could then blow out with Mac
the knife and eventually transform the
whole store basically except wine and
liquor into private label. There was one
other thing though that Joe did as a
sort of strategic hedge against all the
chaos that the uh repeal of fair trade
unleashed in the California retail
sector.
>> Yeah. He sold the company.
>> Yeah.
Yeah. He sold the company.
>> Just a little hedge. So what's the
story? In 1979, Joe and all the other
employee shareholders completely sold
out 100% of the company's equity. And
they sold it to Teao Alrech,
the owner of Aldi Nord, which is one
half of the Aldi global mega store super
chain headquartered in Germany. The even
crazier twist though is that Joe
remained as the CEO of Trader Joe's for
another 10 years after selling the
company until he retired in 1988.
>> This is not the brother that owns the
store called Aldi in the United States.
>> Yes. To be super clear, Aldi does not
own Trader Joe's. One, the Aldi that
exists in the United States is Aldi
sued. The other half of the Aldi empire
that split in the like late 60s, early
70s, the relationship that owns Trader
Joe's is the founder of Aldi Nord, the
other half.
>> And the entity Aldi Nord never actually
bought Trader Joe's.
>> Teao bought it himself personally. And
yes, Trader Joe's is now owned by the
three German foundations that he set up
for after his passing. And if you look
lots of places on the internet, it will
tell you that Aldi owns Trader Joe's.
And that is not true.
>> Okay. How did this happen? So, as we
said, when Joe did the management buyout
of Pronto Markets, the predecessor
entity to Trader Joe's, from Rexall
Drugs, Joe was the founder and the
largest shareholder,
but about like a quarter to a third of
the company was owned by the other early
employees. And so by the time you get to
the mid to late 70s here, a bunch of
those folks had either retired or passed
away and they started having estate
planning needs cuz Trader Joe's starts
becoming uh valuable
>> and they had bought in for like 100
bucks.
>> Yes. A valuation of $15,000,
>> right?
>> So yes, this stock is worth a lot.
>> They've got some giant capital gain.
>> So Joe and the company know this is a
problem coming. And during the mid70s,
they spent a couple years setting up a
whole ownership structure to transfer
ownership of the company into an
official employee stock option plan or
ESOP as it's known in corporate finance.
This is the exact same kind of
structure, by the way, that Dominico D
Sole and Tom Ford used to protect Gucci
as the mechanism by which they rebuffed
Bernard and LVMH in the handbag wars
between Gucci and LVMH. Amazing. Yeah.
>> So the thing though about setting up
this ESOP ownership plan and
transferring ownership of the company
into it is it was predicated on there
being a valuation for the company. And
right as it's about to happen is when
fair trade gets repealed.
>> And interestingly there had not been any
primary capital infusions to look at.
>> The only valuation that ever happened
was the $25,000 transaction when Joe
bought Pronto.
>> Right. It's a big deal for whoever is
coming in to create the valuation for
this because that'll be the basis for
which this entire corporate structure
reorg employees owning it in ESOP is
going to be predicated on.
>> Yep. And the value that the original
shareholders can cash out etc etc. So
then the end of fair trade hits the
whole industry is in disarray and nobody
can agree on a valuation
>> cuz you don't know if the company's
going to survive. You don't know if it's
actually way more valuable now. The
confidence that you have in the
valuation is shot. So, it doesn't get
issued.
>> Yep. So, the ESOP plan goes out the
window. Meanwhile, at the same time,
Aldi had been expanding into America,
out of Germany. And again, Aldi sued the
other brother's company was the one
doing this, not Aldi Nord, Teao
Albbrick's company,
>> who has no exposure to the US market at
this point. Right. But he's a little
jealous of his brother and he really
would like some US market exposure.
Aldi, by the way, uh I didn't know this
till um doing research is a acronym for
Albrrick discount. So there you go.
That's where Aldi comes from. So Teao
and Aldi Nord, they start looking at the
US market too. They actually hire
investment bankers to go over from
Germany and start scouring the US
looking for other grocerers or retailers
in the US that they could acquire and
have Aldi Nord also enter America. And
that's how they find Trader Joe's
>> cuz at this point it's still 20 stores
all in California.
>> Yep. But clearly they've got some magic
here.
>> Yeah.
>> Teao is enraptured. He meets Joe, they
hit it off. He's like, "This is
incredible." He spends years trying to
convince Joe to sell. And Joe's like,
"No way." You know, you're very nice. I
respect you. I appreciate what Aldi's
done, but one, I'm not selling. Like,
why on earth would I sell? Two, no way
in hell am I going to sell to Aldi.
Trader Joe's is special. Like, this will
never be turned into Aldi. And then the
ESOP blows up a couple years later. So,
Joe re-engages with Teao and he
basically says, "I will sell to you."
Part of the reason I'm going to sell to
you is the current situation is that so
much of the income flows through me
personally and I have a marginal tax
rate of 73%.
>> Right. The highest marginal tax bracket
in the US at this point in time is 73%.
Yeah.
>> Imagine for every dollar you make 73
cents is getting paid in taxes. He's
like this is the worst structure
imaginable. Whatever it is, it has to be
different than this.
>> Yeah. So he says to Teao, "All right, I
will sell to you, but here are my
conditions. Number one, Trader Joe's
will not become part of Aldi. We will
share nothing. These are totally
different businesses. You won't use
Trader Joe's as a vehicle for Aldi Nord
to come to America. Two, Ben, like
you're saying, we will have complete
management autonomy and the strategic
operating plan that we are going with
now and for the future is private label.
Not the Aldi massive discount operating
plan. You either believe that and are in
or there's no deal. Three, I can stay on
as CEO for as long or as short as I
like. No management contract. It is 100%
up to me. Four, the price you're going
to pay for the company is three times
what you offered me a couple years ago.
And then number five, the real kicker.
We're going to put all this in contract.
It is going to be a onepage deal.
We're going to put these deal points in
here. One-page contract, no diligence,
no definitive merger agreement BS.
That's it. One page with these points. I
will draft it. Sign the paper if you
like it. Pay me and my employees the
money or no deal. And Teao says, "Great,
I'm in."
>> Awesome.
>> So, they do the deal. That's it. God,
the value of a we trust each other
onepage contract thing is just you just
see it over and over again in the best
businesses and the best partnerships of
all time.
>> I mean, I was reading this in becoming
Trader Joe and Joe's autobiography. I
just like hold like this is why Warren
Buffett wins.
>> Yeah.
>> This is why Bergkshire is Bergkshire.
So Teao Albrich owns Trader Joe's and
then now his three separate foundations
kind of just like the IKEA structure
from that episode own Trader Joe's. And
neither Teao nor certainly Aldi ever
invests a single incremental dollar
beyond the price that they bought it
for. It is very profitable, cash flow
positive, throwing off cash for the
foundations ever since.
>> Yeah. As of 1976, so three years before
the sale, Trader Joe's carried no fixed
interestbearing debt, never recorded a
loss, and became more profitable every
year.
>> Incredible.
>> It's crazy. I'm actually not sure we've
covered a business on acquired like this
that starts with a giant amount of
leverage where the founder just
mortgages his life,
>> sells his house. Yeah.
>> Yeah. and then manages to what within 13
years of founding get out from under it
and then just incrementally pile up more
cash in the business every year. Maybe
Nike.
>> Yeah, maybe Nike.
>> The Japanese trading company is a little
bit of a twist, but
>> yeah, I mean Teo Alrech is a bit of a
twist here, too. But again, that didn't
impact the business at all. He just
became the shareholder. So meanwhile,
there's a whole another parallel story
which is not for this episode, which is
Aldi sued. Aldi is one of the biggest
grocerers in America now.
>> Yes, there are 2500 Aldi's in the US. It
is the fastest growing groceryer in the
US since CO and they plan to open 800
more stores in the next couple years.
But it has absolutely nothing to do with
Trader Joe's
>> or even this branch of the family.
>> Yeah, crazy. Okay, so this feels like
it's some sort of climax, like it's like
the end of the story. The show is called
Acquired. This used to be where we would
end the story. There's like 20some
stores when this transaction happens.
They're still in Southern California.
The company is now 600 stores. We are so
far from
>> today. Yeah.
>> Where Trader Joe's winds up. I mean,
we're only even at this point in time in
the beginning of the transition to
private label. The Trader Joe's as we
know it today has barely been started at
the time of the sale to Teao's family.
>> It's the craziest thing. It really is
just a change in ownership and nothing
else
>> that does not interrupt the compounding
of the business itself.
>> Yeah. There's some kind of great lesson
in there for investors.
>> Yes.
>> All right.
>> But before we tell you that story,
listeners, we have to tell you about
another friend of the show that we are
very excited about here at Acquired HQ.
That's work OS.
>> Yes. If you are building software that's
used in enterprises, you've probably
felt the pain of integrating things like
SSO or SCIM that skim for people in the
know, various permissions, audit logs,
all the other features that your big
enterprise customers demand that you
have. And if you haven't felt this pain
yet, you absolutely will as soon as you
get that first big enterprise customer.
Work OS turns these potential deal
blockers into simple drop-in APIs,
letting you scale revenue earlier in the
life of your company or simplify your
internal codebase if you're already a
larger company. Ben and I were actually
just talking with Work OS's founder,
Michael Grinich, and he pointed out that
especially in this AI era, it's not just
about scaling revenue, it's about
landing a customer so your competitors
don't. Enterprise readiness has just
become table stakes for companies no
matter what their stage. And work OS is
the go-to choice for the best software
companies to shortcut this process and
get back to focusing on what makes their
beer taste better, building the product
itself. Interestingly, this has
accelerated in this AI era. Open AI,
Anthropic, Cursor, Perplexity, Sierra,
Replet, Verscell, and hundreds of other
AI startups rely on work OS as their O
solution. So why have all of them jumped
on the work OS train? Yep, Michael was
telling us it's basically two things.
One, AI companies are just scaling so
much faster that they need things like
authorization, authentication, and SSO
to quickly become enterprise ready in
the early days. And two, unlike the old
world of bring your own SAS product for
your little team, these AI products
reach pretty deep into your customers
systems and data to be the most
effective. So IT departments are
scrutinizing software vendors more than
ever to make sure new products are
compliant before they can adopt them. So
if you are ready to get started with
just a few lines of code for SAML, SKIM,
Arbback, SSO, authorization,
authentication, and everything else to
please IT admins and their checklists,
check out work OS. It's the modern
software platform to make all this
happen. That's works.com and just tell
them that Ben and David sent you. All
right, David, the big expansion.
>> So what happens after the sale? Well,
the immediate answer, of course, as we
said, is nothing.
Joe sticks around as CEO for the next 10
years running the private label
strategy, and it works great. In
Southern California, as you were saying,
Ben, so here's the thing about Joe. He
really is like Soul Price. He was this
incredible entrepreneur, absolute
genius, came up with all of this truly
innovative orthagonal genius strategies
that nobody else in the industry was
pursuing. Saul Price did the same thing
at Costco, but Saul Price isn't the one
who really built Costco. Jim Synagal
built Costco, the scale Costco we know
today. It's the same thing for Joe. He
built Trader Joe's, but he really didn't
have any interest in scaling it and
taking it outside of Southern
California, I kind of think reading
between the lines of some of the things
some of his successors said about him
and some of the stuff in his obituaries
and press, I think he just really didn't
want to travel. I think he wanted to be
close to his family. I think he wanted
all the stores within a day's drive to
and from from his house. So when he
retires in 1988, again, 10 years after
he sold the company, they're only just
shy of 30 total stores. They had just
expanded to Northern California. The
first Northern California store was in
Sanfell, my wife's hometown in Marin.
Great little town. I think for Joe,
that's sort of what his ambition was was
to build one of the greatest retailers
of all time,
>> regional chain,
>> but he was indifferent whether it was
regional or national.
>> It's so interesting how some of the
entrepreneurs we study have this empire
builder strain to them where they're
never satisfied. They have to build the
biggest thing in the world and build
something of consequence to the world.
And if there's an opportunity to do
that, they must go seize it. It's
impossible to not spend their time,
effort, life doing that. And Joe just
wasn't one of those people.
>> The Mark Zuckerbergs.
>> I think he kind of looked at it and
thought, "Well, to what end? What is the
point of building something giant? I'm
the shareholder. I like this business. I
have this great life. I've very
positively impacted all the people who
work for me, all of our customers who
shop for us. I've helped birth the wine
industry in California and America.
>> This is a thing I can obsessively
polish. I do like constantly making it
better and making it more resilient and
all these things, but bigger wasn't
necessarily the goal.
>> Yeah, I can totally relate to it. But
national expansion clearly is what
should happen next year with the
business.
>> Yes. So, in 1987, as Joe's getting ready
to retire, he hires an old friend from
Stanford from his GSP days, guy named
John Shields to come in as president and
COO under him for a year and then be the
anointed successor to take over. John
after GSP had gone and worked at Macy's
and then at Mvin the huge retailer that
got acquired by Target. So John knew
retail knew national expansion and
operations and most importantly Joe had
known him for a long time going all the
way back to Stanford and trusted him. So
on January 1st, 1989,
John takes over as CEO from Joe, second
CEO in Trader Joe's history.
>> It's crazy. This is 36 years ago. The
modern Trader Joe's is all formed after
the sale.
>> After this, Joe lays down the strategy.
>> Yes.
>> And all of the execution happens after
with some tweaks along the way as we'll
talk about. John does as expected, you
know, what he was hired to do.
Basically, he does national expansion.
So, he takes Trader Joe's from, I think,
as best as I can tell, I think it was 27
stores to 175 over the next 12, 13 years
that he's CEO. And importantly, he made
the jump across the country.
>> Yes, let's hop all the way to the East
Coast. So, they decided to start in
Boston and build out a set of stores in
the 500 mile corridor from Boston to DC.
At this point, you should be able to go,
I know why they did that. It is the most
dense population of universities in
America all along that corridor. And
it's kind of crazy. Dan Bane, who would
take over as the third CEO of Trader
Joe's in 2001, he did a podcast just
recently, he actually talked about it.
He's like, "Yeah, I probably wouldn't
have made that decision if I were CEO at
the time." Really? You're taking a
regional Southern California company
where all the culture, all the DNA, all
the learning, it's all there, and you're
saying
>> the Northeast seems like a good place.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, that's really the
strategy for the '9s and the John
Shields era. It's all about taking the
strategy, the retail concept that Joe
built and just scaling it up across the
country. that and fully realizing the
private label plan that took a decade
decades to shift everything that they
were selling to Trader Joe's branded.
So, the third Trader Joe's CEO, Dan
Bane, comes into the company in 1998,
first as president of the West Coast
operations. And he previously had been
the CFO of a grocery wholesale business
and like John Shields knew Joe and
Trader Joe's intimately over a long
period of time because his wife was the
company's auditor for like 20 years,
like tax auditor, an accountant. So what
Dan really does is create the Trader
Joe's that we all know today. And it's
the same core strategy that Joe had
developed, especially with the focus on
private label, the value to customers,
the same target audience, but Dan
expands it to all categories of grocery.
So here's the thing. When Dan started at
the company in the late 90s, we've
alluded to this a little bit throughout
the episode, Trader Joe's was actually a
pretty different store than it is today.
The average Trader Joe's customer came
in once per month. And Dan says in a
podcast interview about when he started,
"At the time, we weren't really a
grocery store. We were that store that
sold wine, cheese, and nuts. We were
sort of a party store.
>> And this is about the late 90s.
>> Yeah. Party as in like when you are
throwing a party, you go to Trader
Joe's.
>> So Dan comes in and he says, "Hey,
there's actually a pretty obvious
opportunity for us here to really grow
same store sales and that's people love
us. We're such a great fit for our
target customer base. We just need to
give them the right product assortment
to keep coming back more often. We need
to be more of a grocery store and less
of a party store. And this is quite
different than Joe's strategy. So Joe
actually writes in his autobiography, we
made no effort to have a complete
assortment. No sugar, no salt, no flour,
etc. unless we could be outstanding in
it and make a sufficient number of
dollars from it. Obviously, that is very
different than Trader Joe's today.
>> It's funny, I still think about them as
they're not a complete grocery store.
Like I kind of have to go to Trader
Joe's in addition to my normal grocery
store run, but they're a lot closer now.
>> You can buy sugar, you can buy flour,
you can buy salt. Exactly. Yeah. Joe had
no interest in being in those
categories. He was really all about that
end of one. Every product must be
differentiated. Dan came in and said,
"We can still have that ethos and most
of our products can be that way, but we
can also serve our customers in their
weekly grocery needs."
>> Now, you can look at this as that's a
great insight and he was right cuz he
massively increased the frequency that
people come to the store. Or you could
look at it as that is the first little
chipping away at the foundation of what
makes Trader Joe's special and we might
see great revenue growth and all the
numbers ticking up in the near term. But
does it take a bite out of their soul in
a way that will catch up to them
eventually when they become just like
everyone else?
>> Yep.
>> And we don't know. But that is the
continuum that that choice exists on.
>> Yes. Given that he started down this
path 24 years ago and people still
really love Trader Joe's, I think
they're doing pretty good.
>> Yes.
>> So before Dan took over, Trader Joe's
stores carried about 1,500 SKs.
>> Wow. That's really few.
>> Really few. He takes that up to about
4,000. So that's what this is. You know,
it's the sugar, the flour, the salt.
It's more than doubling the number of
SKUs. But importantly, he says, "We are
not going to become a supermarket." So,
a 4,000 SKS is still way way way less
than the average supermarket again has
50,000 SKs. The average Walmart has like
150,000,
>> right?
>> He says, "The way we're going to do this
is we are not going to change the
footprint of the stores. Same square
footage,
>> same concept. We need to rem merchandise
the stores to serve our customers and
give them what they need on a weekly
basis without changing the nature of
what the store is.
>> So, we're going to fit two and a half
times the amount of stuff in the same
square footage.
>> Yes. And we're going to do it such that
every product on every shelf in every
aisle passes the 5 foot test. For every
customer who is at least 5 feet tall,
they should be able to reach every
aisle. So, we can't just stack to the
ceiling like Costco. Fascinating.
>> And so when you go into Trader Joe's, it
really is very dense.
>> Oh, it's unbelievably dense. I mean,
that's my complaint, too, is that
whenever I'm reaching for something,
there's like a guy behind me trying to
get it. There's a woman in front of me
trying to like back out of that area.
It's funny. I've stopped thinking about
Trader Joe's as the wine and cheese shop
and more as the it's defined to me by
that one diagonal aisle down the middle
with the open freezer chests that has an
amazing assortment of glorified TV
dinners.
>> Yes.
>> But also on top of the glorified TV
dinners, there's like the shelves with
all the amazing nuts and chocolate
snacks. And then there's like the thin
ribbon in between the shelves and the
open freezers where they have one more
inventory area for all the little
things. There's so much in that aisle
and there's always like 40 people in it.
Also, how genius is it? The freezers are
open. So, I'm sure it's very costly
wasting the cold air, but think about
how much more likely you are to just
reach in and grab some Indian food or
some mandarin orange chicken or
whatever.
>> Well, also they got to be when you've
got 50 or 100 people in that same aisle
all reaching in. You can't have people
opening and closing doors all the time,
>> right? So, I'm sure the psychological
thing of, "Oh, just go grab that little
box of food, plus how many more people
they can jam in that aisle makes the
open freezer chest totally worth it."
>> So, you are absolutely hitting on the
other part of the Trader Joe's tapestry.
Trader Joe's is a social experience,
whether you like it or not.
But for their target customers, this is
what they want. So if you think about
the grocery retail landscape, it's
predicated on basically two things.
Efficiency and convenience, which means
lots of SKUs, real efficient to get in
and out of the stores. You want
e-commerce, we got e-commerce, omni
channel, baby.
>> You want to drive, we got a big parking
lot for you.
>> All these things. And then the other
side of that coin is our target customer
is families. We want the American family
to shop here because you got a big whole
hunk of buying power and you're buying a
lot of stuff.
>> Yep.
>> That's not Trader Joe's.
>> No, it's not.
>> Trader Joe's is the opposite of that on
every dimension. It's not efficient to
shop here. Our parking lots are a mess.
You're going to be packed into these
much smaller stores with a whole lot of
other people.
>> It's going to be unpleasant if you have
a toddler with you.
>> Oh yeah, you don't want to bring your
kids here. I mean, sure, yeah, they've
got the treasure hunt thing and people
do bring their kids to Trader Joe's, but
I really had this emotional and mental
struggle throughout this whole episode
research process because I'm reading all
about how great Trader Joe's is. I have
so much admiration for this company. Of
course, I love it. And I'm just thinking
about my own life. I'm like, I used to
shop at Trader Joe's all the time. I was
a Trader Joe's customer and then
something happened in the last couple
years and I never shop there anymore.
>> What could have happened?
>> I'm wrapping my brain. Is it like
acquired has been too successful?
Is that the problem? Am I now like one
of those people? And then I read this
other book for research called Build a
Brand Like Trader Joe's by this guy Mark
Gardner. or was he the guy that got the
job at Trader Joe's?
>> So Mark was an advertising executive and
he always wondered how Trader Joe's had
built this incredible brand. And so he
was like, "What the hell? I'll just go
work at Trader Joe's. I'm going to find
out. I'm going to be an employee. I'll
be a man on the inside and see what it's
like." So he did it and he wrote a book
about it. And I'm reading this book and
I'm like, "Oh my god, this is why I
stopped being a Trader Joe's customer.
It's not for families. I had kids.
That's what happened. So everything
about the Trader Joe's experience
naturally lends itself to young
professionals and retirees.
In the Dan Bane era, they go all in on
this. So intentionally, the experience
there is to socialize with other people
and the crew members of the store. They
hire specifically for extraversion in
the people that they hire. Part of the
reason why all the employees in Trader
Joe's work every part of the store and
everybody does the cash register and
everybody does bagging is to maximize
interaction with customers.
>> Wow. There's a bunch of Reddit comments
around, hey, was this Trader Joe's
employee hitting on me? It's like, no,
they're just that friendly.
>> They are screening for this in the
hiring process. They're looking for
former theater kids, basically.
>> Yeah, I would argue on this not for
families thing. I I was actually talking
to my friend who's a mom of two and she
pointed out that it is so tiring making
food for kids every night. And Trader
Joe's, while the shopping experience is
not optimized to bring your family in,
it's actually amazing to just go and get
pretty healthy, totally ready to eat,
grab it out of the freezer, throw it in
the microwave meals, and there's a
pretty big variety of it, and you can
mix and match and get different ideas.
So, it's like even though that's not the
target, it can work really well.
>> They're not intentionally trying to
alienate, but this extends to the
product strategy, too. The frozen meals,
which are such a part of Trager Joe's
today, they're individually packaged,
individual serving sizes. Oh, yeah. This
is the exact opposite of the
supermarkets at family size.
>> We ran out of beef bulgogi last night.
Made it. And it was like, well, I guess
that's all there is.
>> You're not finding family size at Trader
Joe's,
>> right? Once I realized this, I was like,
"Oh my god, this is genius. They're
doing what Joe's always done. They're
differentiating versus other retailers.
Every other groceryer out there, it's
all about the families,
>> right? Bring your big car. Bring your
whole family.
>> Bring your kids. We'll get you in and
out. Not Trader Joe's.
>> We should move on. I am a skeptic on the
whole social thing. I don't talk to
people when I go there. I don't want to
talk to people when I go there. Most
people that are in there don't seem to
want to talk to anyone. We're all just
in close quarters, but the stuff that we
want is there, so we're all there.
>> I think most people don't care that much
about the other shoppers there. They do
actually care about the employees,
though. You have a store that you're
going to every week with a very low
turnover employee base. Trader Joe's
employee turnover, I think, is five or
6% annually. So
>> super low, unbelievably low.
>> The average tenure of a crew member is
like 10 to 12 years. You're really going
to get to know those people. Like I mean
imagine, especially if you're a retiree,
which is a core part of the demographic
here. You really want the social
experience.
>> Yep.
>> Anyway, Dan really puts all this into
strategy at the company.
>> Makes sense. Well, David, I know there's
one more big chapter that you've been uh
holding back from telling the story.
>> Ready to unccork here. So, the crowning
product achievement of the Dan Bane era
of Trader Joe's starts pretty early in
his tenure in 2002. I'm sure you have
all been waiting for it. Tuck Chuck,
baby.
Not a private label product.
Interestingly enough,
>> so interesting. For the volume that they
do, it's unbelievable.
>> But is an exclusive product. So, the
story is wild. But first, I'm going to
open my bottle of Charles Shaw here that
I've been saving the whole episode.
>> So, I got a Savana Blanc. I assumed the
red blend would be the cheapest.
Amazingly, all the Charles Shaw are the
same price. And at Seattle Trader Joe's,
it was $3.99, which come on, supposed to
be two buck chuck, but inflation kills
you.
>> Been a lot of inflation since 2002. Ben,
>> I'm curious what you are opening.
>> I am opening a California cab 2023.
>> Nice. Beautiful label with a uh
beautiful looking gazebo here in the
image. Established 1979.
Really? Gosh, there must be a story
behind all this.
>> Why is there a gazebo? This whole thing
looks very generic to me.
>> Amazingly, it is not
>> really.
>> That is part of what makes the story so
incredible.
>> Who is Charles Shaw? So, as I pour my
cab here,
>> cheers, by the way,
>> to 10 years of acquired.
>> To 10 years of acquired.
>> What better way to celebrate 10 years of
acquired than with a glass of two
buckchuck as we were recording the
episode on Trader Joe's. So,
there is a real Charles Shaw.
and Charles Shaw founded a winery in
Napa in 1974,
right at the very beginning of the
bottle shock era, the comeup of Napa,
changing wine in America. And Charles
and the eponomous Charles Shaw winery
and label was a high-end wine maker
right there with Heights and Free
Market, all the other. was like a real
player in the Napa ecosystem. This is
wild. And that was all through the 70s
and the 80s.
>> Well, I mean, he's still the biggest
player in the Napa ecosystem by volume.
>> Well, unfortunately for Charles, he's
not.
>> I see.
>> His name is. So then in the '9s
he has a series of missteps and the
winery Charles Shaw ends up going
bankrupt. Now this is not a uh uncommon
story in wine.
>> You know the list of bankrupt wineries
in Napa and Soma is long.
>> Have you ever heard that apherism? How
do you uh become a millionaire wine
maker?
>> Start as a billionaire.
>> Yes. Exactly.
So he's part of the first wave of
wealthy people that get into the wine
business, have success, and then have
some missteps and lose it all.
>> Yep. So he goes bankrupt in 1995
and the label, the brand name and the
trade name, Charles Shaw and literally
the label with the gazebo and the font
and the design and everything gets
bought out of bankruptcy in 1995. Not
the winery, separate, not the real
estate, not the grapes, not the nothing,
just the label. By an entity called
Bronco Wines for $27,000.
Ben, have you ever heard of Bronco
Wines?
>> No, I've never heard of Bronco Wines. At
least there's like something in the back
of my head that makes me feel like it's
the parent company of something I have
heard of, though.
>> Well, let me tell you about Bronco
Wines. It is short for brothers and
cousin. And it was founded in 1973, same
era as all of this stuff by one Fred
Franzia. And no,
>> his brother Joe and his cousin John all
named Frania.
>> The name Franzia might mean something to
people. Ben, I see you lighting up.
>> To anyone who's ever been a college
student,
So, the Franzas, this the story goes
deeper. Not what you would expect.
>> Have you ever done a tour to Franzia?
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We used to do that at
Princeton. That was an Ohio State thing,
too. Yes.
>> Must be just a general American college
experience thing.
>> I'm glad we opened the wine for this
section of the story.
>> So, like I said, it goes deeper. The
Franas, it turns out, were nephews of
Ernest Gallow. That name might also mean
something to you. The franias are part
of the gallow family.
>> It's almost more like the gallows are
part of the frania family, but you could
argue either way. Wow. So, the franas,
completely separate from the gallows,
had their own big time California wine
business in the era before bottleshock
and Napa and Sonoma coming up and then
during and after the frania business,
the older generation. And so the
generation above Fred and John and Joe
sold out in 1973 right as wines are
starting to have their moment in America
to none other than CocaCola.
>> Wow.
>> So Francis were making real wine at this
point. Franzia as you know it the boxed
wine does not exist yet. Coca-Cola
operates it for a few years and then
decides you know what we don't actually
want to be in the wine business. They
sell franzia to an entity called the
wine group.
>> And the wine group is then what makes
the boxed wine frania here in the US. So
the franza that you know is the same
family but two business owners later.
>> Okay.
>> There's a theme here though of taking a
brand name and repurposing it for a more
mass market shall we say. So when the
older generation of the Franias sell the
business to Coke, Fred and his
generation, his brother and his cousin,
like they're pissed. They're like,
"Screw you guys." Like, "We wanted to
run the business. We want to be in the
wine business. Why did you sell the
company? We were going to take this
thing over." So they're like, "F it.
We're just going to go out and start our
own wine company and recreate the family
business." And that's Bronco Wines. But
it's going to be informed by everything
that's happened since. So this first
generation of the rich people that come
to Napa and Soma, start these wineries,
lose their shirts, go bankrupt, of which
Charles Shaw is part, Fred and the New
Bronco Wines develop a business plan.
They are essentially going to become a
distressed winery buyout shop. They are
just going to vacuum up.
>> This is what Bronco Wines is.
>> Okay. And that's how they end up buying
Charles Shaw.
>> That's how they end up buying Charles
Shaw among hundreds of other wineries
and brands. Sometimes they buy the
grapes, sometimes they buy the wineries,
sometimes they buy the vineyards,
sometimes they just buy the labels and
the brands, which is what they do with
Charles Shaw in 1995 for $27,000.
>> Listeners, just so you know, there have
been a billion bottles sold of Charles
Shaw.
>> Well over a billion. Yeah, there were a
billion sold like probably 10ish years
ago. So, probably at least two, if not
three billion by now.
>> $27,000.
>> $27,000. So, as you would imagine, this
doesn't make the younger Frania's uh
popular characters in uh Napa, shall we
say?
>> I bet. lot of resentment from the rich,
snotty folks that were building these
wineries and then going out of business
and Fred and his brother and cousin are
vacuuming them up for pennies and
trading on their brands. But this
actually is the other part of the story
of wine becoming big in America. You've
got all the great wineries and the great
awards that they're winning and Napa and
Sonoma becoming real players.
>> And and it is crazy. I don't think most
people know this that Trader Joe's gets
a lot of the credit for bringing
California wines to people to the masses
in the US. And here's where these two
parts of the market intersect. So what
Fred and Frania and Bronco are doing is
they're bringing it to the beer drinking
population.
They saw what happened to the family
name with the box wine with Franzia.
They saw what their cousins over at
Gallow were doing and they're like,
"Well, shoot. We can do this, too. Like,
why should wine just be for snobs? F
that."
>> Amazing.
>> Fred's perspective on this is like,
"Hey, look, there's a huge opportunity
to make wine the new beer." And you
people in Napa are completely missing
the boat on this. He was once asked in
an interview how he could sell wine for
less than the price of bottled water.
And his reply was, "Don't you get it?
They're overcharging for the water.
So, a couple years into Tupac Chuck
here, the New Yorker interviews him and
runs this big profile. I'm like, "What
is Charles Shaw? You know, who is Fred
Frania? Where did it come from? What is
this phenomenon?" Fred starts off the
interview by saying, "Take that and
shove it, Napa."
When asked about the success of Charles
Shaw, he's a real maverick.
10% of Trader Joe's 40 million bottles
of wine that they sell every year is
Charles Shaw.
>> It's amazing.
>> I mean, we didn't tee up this section
enough for how meaningful this is. We
both just kind of like opened our
Charles Shaw bottles and cheers, but 10%
of the time when someone walks in to get
some wine from Trader Joe's, they walk
out with this.
>> Yes. Often a giant case or two of this.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. So, it was 1995 when Bronco buys
the Charles Shaw label for $27,000
>> out of bankruptcy.
>> Tubuk Chuck doesn't actually launch
until 2002. What happens?
>> Well, they got to somehow go grow a ton
of grapes, right? And have a giant
processing facility. And
>> you are not thinking like Fred Franzia.
So he's vacuuming up this whole
portfolio of assets that he figures he
will find a use for eventually. So fast
forward to 2001, there is a huge
overproduction surplus of wine in
California. I think both it was a bumper
year for grapes and then demand was way
down in 2001. A major misjudgment. So
there's lots of surplus wine out there.
>> And a lot of paper rich people in San
Francisco are not rich. Just 50 mi
south.
>> Exactly. So Fred sees the opportunity of
a lifetime. Really? He and Bronco come
in and they buy up basically all of this
surplus finished already made produced
wine at dirt cheap below the cost of
production. What do they just like mix
it all together?
>> I think they kept it separate, but he's
got this huge huge amount of unbranded
surplus wine on his hands that is good
wine from a lot of different wineries.
And he needs an outlet and a a vehicle,
a vessel, you might say.
>> Wait, but aren't they all going to taste
different?
>> Sure, who cares?
And this is when he hooks up with Dan
Bane and Trader Joe's. Wow. It is the
perfect wine for Trader Joe's.
>> It is the perfect marriage here. So,
they take this glut of mostly genuinely
good wine. They bottle it up, they use
the Charles Shaw label, they pull it out
of the portfolio, dust it off the bin,
and they throw it up in Trader Joe's for
a buck.99.
I'm going to read a few quotes here from
this amazing oral history of Tupacchuck
that ran in Thrillist a couple years ago
and was the main source for all this.
Franzia used the exact same name and the
exact same label on the bottle as the
old Charles Shaw back when it was a real
winery. Even the same original artwork,
a picture of a little pigota.
>> It's funny that the Thrillist article
calls it a pagota. listeners, we reached
out to Elizabeth Shaw, the daughter of
Charles Shaw, to fact check this
section, and she informed us it was not
a pagod, but a gazebo.
>> Yes, thank you, Elizabeth. The thrillist
quote continues, that used to sit by the
tennis court on Charles Shaw's Napa
property. He being Fred Franzia shocked
the world by slapping a 199 label on it.
Everybody in the industry thought it was
impossible. He had the testicles that
nobody else had to sell wine at that
price. He'd shoot over to Portugal or
France and knock on the door of a cork
or glass producer and say, "If I write
you a check for $2 million today, will
you fill up this boat with cork? I don't
care about quality.
It gets better."
People went apeshit.
This was around 2002. articles were
saying this wine is amazing and actually
drinkable. It was a fad, the Macarena of
wine. I would always hear about it from
college students. And it was this
bluecollar pride thing. People thought
this bottle is just as good as the one
that's $20. Screw those snobs. Together,
Fred Franzia and Bronco and Trader Joe's
unlock replacing beer. Not replacing,
but you know, wrestling in on beer as
the alcoholic drink of the masses.
>> Amazing. Okay, so what grapes go into it
now? Cuz there's not this glut anymore.
>> Can't find that information.
>> Yeah, classic Trader Joe's.
>> Yeah, Bronco isn't saying and Trader
Joe's isn't saying either. But at least
for those first few years, and this
really helps establish the brand and the
product, it's genuinely really good wine
that just was surplus on the market that
was going into two buck chuck. So
obviously this becomes a like grand slam
home run success for everybody. As you
noted, Ben, prices have increased with
inflation. Tbuk Chuck is now generally
somewhere between$ 2.99 and$3.99.
But yeah, completely revolutionizes mass
consumption of wine. You know, before
that, yes, frania and boxed wine
existed, but this is real wine,
>> right,
>> in a bottle priced at two bucks.
>> Yeah. In The Secret Life of Groceries,
he calls it essentially unquenchable
demand.
>> So, here are the stats that I could
find. 2009, so 7 years after the launch,
they pass 400 million bottles sold. 3
years after that, they pass 800 million
bottles sold. Bronco/Trader
Joe's have confirmed out there that over
a billion bottles have been sold. I'm
sure that is grossly underestimating how
many have been sold. Several billions,
I'm sure.
>> So, if they're selling 150 million a
year, which might be a little low on the
estimate, that's 250,000 bottles per
store.
That's nuts.
>> Which would put it at 600 bottles per
day per store.
>> What did you say a minute ago?
Unquenchable demand for this.
>> Unquenchable demand. I mean, but where
else are you going to go and get a
legitimate bottle of wine for three
bucks, four bucks? Nowhere.
>> Nowhere. So Fred Franzia dies in uh 2022
and the New York Times runs a big
obituary about him in which they quote
Zack Gabel who's a Somalier and host of
the Vine Pair podcast and has been in
the industry for a long time. He says,
"I looked at stuff like Charles Shaw
with a lot of condescension, but it
really helped create in this country
what had long existed in Europe. this
very affordable, very accessible, widely
available wine that people who wanted to
drink wine essentially daily could
afford to do so no matter what their
income. It's incredible.
>> And you got to wonder how often are
people walking into Trader Joe's to get
a bottle of two buck chuck and walking
out with 50 bucks of other stuff.
>> Yes.
Of high dollar density items that are
sprinkled all over the store.
>> Would love to have some nuts to go with
my two buck check.
>> Yes.
All right, David. Should I catch us up
to the business today?
>> 600 stores.
>> 600 stores. Well, it's worth saying
Trader Joe's has become a little less
differentiated today. As you said, the
stores are bigger. And actually, some of
this is a quote from Joe before he
passed away to Benjamin Lore as he's
writing this book. He says, "The stores
are bigger. The skew count is higher
than in the old days. You really can't
do the limited batches of amazing deals
anymore because, you know, they really
are at scale. It's not like they're just
going to be like, "Oh, great. You got
this one pile of obscure nuts that we
just need to unload in the next couple
weeks. Great. No problem. We'll take
that." They really do need to be able to
distribute at scale. They try to keep
that ethos with the sort of seasonal
stuff. Like right now, I'm enjoying the
mini hold the cones that are the holiday
themed, but this is very planned and
seasonal. It's harder to find suppliers
that can manufacture at this scale. So
they're constrained to a certain set of
suppliers they can work with, but
clearly it's still working and it's
working better than ever. So perhaps the
lesson is you can't be too precious.
Once you establish your differentiation,
there are ways to take advantage of your
scale, but still keep the soul of what
made you different even though you're
not living it to the extreme the way
that you had to when you were younger.
So by revenue, David, you found this.
There are lots of incorrect sources
around the internet estimating their
revenue. You found a podcast with Dan
Bane where he throws out a significantly
higher revenue figure than the rest of
the internet thinks.
>> Yes. So he says on this podcast that
when he retired in 2023, they were doing
north of 20 billion a year in revenue
and they had just hit 1 billion when he
joined the company in the late '9s. The
estimates that had been going around the
internet and are still out there if you
search are what more like 16 17. We know
in 2023 it was over 20.
>> Yes. How did you find that podcast?
>> A lot of googling. We'll link to it in
our sources. It's a really obscure
leadership podcast that Dan randomly
went on in January of this year in 2025.
>> So north of 20 billion in revenue two
years ago. So we can kind of extrapolate
when we get to growth rate where that is
today. earnings. We truly have no idea
other than knowing that every year
they've generated more absolute dollars
of profit than the previous year. On
growth since selling to the Alrech
family, they've grown stores at about
10% each year. And over the last 20
years or so, they've grown revenue at a
little over 11% per year. So that puts
us in the 24 25 billion of revenue this
year ballpark.
>> Yep. Again, way higher than I saw
anywhere reported on the rest of the
internet.
>> Yep. The really interesting stat though
is sales per square foot.
>> So, the sales per square foot is
estimated to be over $2,000
today. That is the single highest sales
per foot of any grocery store and twice
its nearest competitor in Whole Foods.
>> Yeah, it's over 4x the industry average.
Even Costco, who we extolled on the
Costco episode, is 1,200 a foot.
>> Yeah, Costco's have really big stores.
>> Trader Joe's has really small stores
that are densely densely packed with
high revenue items.
>> I mean, this is really incredible. They
are twice as good by this metric, which
is really like the key metric in the
retail industry.
>> It's efficiency. I mean it doesn't
include everything in your overhead but
you know rent is a giant part of your
costs. So your efficiency on your rent
is effectively the sales per foot. If
you look at margins people estimate
their gross margins are in the low to
mid 20% which again we should underscore
all this brilliant business strategy
customers are getting a great deal.
Their gross margins are only low to mid
20%. Most of the grocery industry is in
the kind of 27, 28, 29, 30%. But Trader
Joe's just doesn't need as much margin
since they have lower overhead and lower
operating costs compared to those bigger
stores. In terms of geography where they
are, they're in 43 states. They now have
608 stores. They have 70,000 employees.
and a 100% of their captains, this is
the store manager, were promoted from
the first mate role or the mate role,
which is effectively the number two. And
80% of those came from crew members. So
it is a 70,000 person organization, most
of which is promoted internally, which
is amazing.
>> And as best as I could tell, I don't
know about you, I think headquarters
staff, like corporate staff, is still
pretty tiny. I think that at least is a
goal. I think that's a value of theirs
is to do that. You know, they get all
kinds of great benefits and stuff for
grocery store workers. They get 15% put
into a retirement plan. They have
healthcare benefits, dental, all that
stuff. But the real kicker, they get a
20% discount at Trader Joe's,
>> which no one gets cuz they never have
any sort of discounts.
>> The one way to get a sale at Trader
Joe's is to work at Trader Joe's.
>> Yes.
But it is crazy like this whole thing
about the employees is a belief that if
you pay more you can get better people
who will retain longer that lower your
new employee training costs that lower
your overhead each employee will be more
productive be able to do higher quality
work and most importantly they'll be
happy employees that are there to
delight customers.
>> Yes. And as I was talking about earlier
this plays into the social aspect and
the extraversion and that's really
important for the customer base. I do
really genuinely believe that's true.
The biggest thing here though is
turnover. So grocery store employee
turnover.
>> It's got to be like 50 plus percent per
year
>> is some of the highest in the entire
labor market. I think it might be like
65 maybe even 70%. Trader Joe's is
onetenth of that compared to industry
average.
>> Y
>> I mean that means that for your average
grocery store you are turning over your
entire store workforce every year and a
half. The answer of how you run a
business like that is you don't actually
run the business. You are a real estate
company and you hire the brands to go do
everything.
>> Yep. And you make money from the brands.
Trader Joe's has this philosophy of we
only make money one way and that's when
someone checks out an item and pays
money to us. We don't make money from
our suppliers. Whereas those other
grocery stores, they actually make a lot
of money from the suppliers. They make a
lot of money in slotting fees and in
advertising. And it sets up a bad
incentive where you are happy to put
stuff on your shelves that doesn't sell
as long as they're going to pay you a
lot in slotting fees and in advertising
>> cuz you're not really making your
profits from selling the goods,
>> right? And you might be making some, but
you can also make money another way. And
Trader Joe's is like, "No, this way
we're only putting stuff on our shelves
that people actually want." Now, the
real question before we sort of wind
this home is if they were publicly
traded, what would they be worth? And
this is an exercise I always like to do
every time we do private companies.
>> This is a fascinating one because
grocery industry revenue multiples of
publicly traded companies are extremely
low. They're like 1x, maybe 1.5x.
>> It's much worse than that. So, first
let's look at Costco, the most similar
business in some ways. Costco is growing
about 8% per year, so probably a little
slower than Trader Joe's by most
estimates, and has a 3% net income
margin. Costco trades at 1.6x revenue,
sky-high,
>> and that is the jewel of the industry.
>> Yes. For a second comp, Walmart, which
isn't all grocery, but a lot of it is
grocery, has similar net income margins,
similar growth, maybe it grows a little
slower than Costco. Walmart trades at
1.3x revenue.
>> Okay. What does Kroger trade at? Kroger
trades at 0.3x revenue and Albertson's
at 0.1x revenue. Oh,
>> those are much slower growth businesses
and Kroger's actually shrinking with
razor thin net income margins between 1
and 2%. But the question then is where
do you put Trader Joe's in this? Trader
Joe's probably trades at north of 1x,
but probably not all the way at Costco
1.6x.
I don't know, maybe around there. So on
that 23 24 billion in revenue that we
estimated, call it a 32 to 34 billion
company, maybe a $35 billion company,
which delightfully
puts them worth slightly more than
>> 7-Eleven.
That's great. So here's what I think is
really interesting about that. We don't
cover many 30 billion4 billion companies
unacquired these days.
>> I literally have in my notes, this might
be the smallest company we've covered in
recent memory by value.
>> So if the takeaway from that is, wow,
this is really an outlier and it's a
much smaller business than they usually
cover unacquired, I think that's
actually the wrong takeaway.
>> Yeah. Trader Joe's
first Joe and now under the ownership of
the Albright Foundations
is willing to play such a long game in
the fullness of time. I bet Trader Joe's
will be worth at least 10x that.
>> Ooh, what a stock pick.
>> Well, okay. Simply because they have
nearly infinite expansion potential
ahead of them internationally.
They are only in the US. And maybe
management has decided we will only ever
be in the US.
>> Is Kroger international? Is Safeway
international?
>> Aldi works internationally. Costco works
internationally. Walmart works
internationally. 7-Eleven works
internationally. There is no reason why
Trader Joe's wouldn't work in other
geographies around the world and work
just as well. They can sell American
food as exotic like cheeseburgers.
>> Okay, so just to prove my point on this,
I have a whole list of miscellaneous fun
stuff about Trader Joe's that didn't
make it into the rest of the episode. My
number one thing is Pirate Joe's, which
is a native Canadian who was living in
the US, decided there would be an
opportunity to bring Trader Joe's
products to Canada. He went all up and
down the West Coast buying Trader Joe's
products out of stores. set up a
warehouse in Vancouver and sold Trader
Joe's products and there was like
infinite demand. It created this whole
international legal instance. There is
demand in other countries for Trader
Joe's. I think on that alone in the
fullness of time can be worth at least
10x.
>> Interesting. And the question is does
the concept work? Let's say they're even
just scoped to America where they
haven't fully saturated yet. Does the
concept work to address a larger
audience than the current audience we've
talked about all episode?
>> Interesting. I'm not sure if it does,
but I also don't think it matters. San
Francisco is a perfect case study for
this. There were already several Trader
Joe's in San Francisco and recently one
opened in Hayes Valley. It's nuts. The
lines are ridiculous,
>> right? It's the Costco thing where they
keep actually being able to open way
more Costco anywhere than they thought
they could. They could probably open
three or four more Trader Joe's in San
Francisco with the same target audience
and still not be able to serve all the
demand.
>> Yeah, it's funny. My takeaway on the
market cap on it being small in value is
grocery as a category is so much more
important than it is valuable. It's
almost like the Loheed Martin episode
that we did. It's not a super valuable
company by the standards of what we
typically cover on acquired. It is one
of the most important companies in the
world and grocery is sort of the same
way in any given community. You're in a
food desert without it. It's essential
for life. We need oxygen, water, and
grocery stores. And Trader Joe's happens
to have built one of the most or
probably the most culturally relevant
brand in an essential category, even if
it ends up financially not being as
valuable as these other companies we
cover.
>> Yep. I totally agree with that.
>> The cultural relevance really is crazy,
though. Have you seen the prices of
these limited edition tote bags on the
resale markets?
>> Oh, yeah. They're like fashion items in
Europe.
>> I almost was like stocking up at the
store yesterday when we were there.
>> You could start a pirate Joe's for uh
Amazing.
>> All right. All right. Well, you were
pitching me before we started on when we
wind down the story, we should lay out
the entire ballet with what is the way
that all these puzzle pieces fit
together and what sort of drives the
flywheel.
>> Great. Let's do it.
>> So, I would throw out it all starts with
this insight that we don't need to stock
everything. People just need to trust us
that they'll find great stuff when they
come here. And if you have that, then
you can flip all the assumptions of the
grocery business on its head.
>> Yep, I totally agree. You should always
remember that Trader Joe's started as a
wine merchant and they merchandise
everything like wines. And that's
exactly how you would behave as a wine
merchant. There's no way you could ever
stock every wine in the world. You need
to be a merchant and have an assortment.
>> Yes. So, you need to be a merchant. You
need high dollar density items. avoid
taking up large amounts of space for
things like paper towels. And a
correlary to that, they aren't focused
on the margin percentage of each item.
We didn't talk about this yet, but they
actually don't apply a consistent
markup. They focus on the absolute
dollars of margin in each item. So, if
something is $20 and you only make a
couple bucks of margin on it, that's
actually not bad as long as it doesn't
take up too much shelf space. you'd much
rather have that than sell something for
$4 where you're only making like a
dollar of margin. Even though on a
percentage basis it sounds better.
Trader Joe's is like, "No, no, the
scarce thing is the square inches on the
shelf." You then get very quickly into,
"Okay, so they've got this low skew
count. Not as low as the old days, but
still only like 4,000 SKs." And if you
keep this constraint really
aggressively, it means that you're not
wasting money on your less productive
square feet. Every square foot is sort
of being used to its highest capacity.
Everybody, of course, wishes they could
do this. Why doesn't everybody else just
do this? Trader Joe's has spent decades
making every customer comfortable with
the idea that you won't find everything
there. It works with their brand promise
in a way that Walmart mini would totally
fail. a Walmart with less stuff. Cool.
I'm not going there. The whole premise
of Walmart is all the stuff.
>> Yep. And of course, the way that works
is if you're only buying relatively very
few SKs, then you can consolidate your
buying power buying a lot of that skew.
>> That's exactly right. And so when you're
buying a lot of any given skew from your
supplier, it means you can lower your
unit prices with economies of scale
because you're a bulk buyer, which you
can then pass on to your customers. So
they get additional savings in value. It
also means you can usually avoid a
middleman or a distributor and you can
go directly to the manufacturer. Again,
cutting out random margin that gets made
that ends up costing more to your
customer. And if you're going directly
to the manufacturer, I feel like this is
if you give a mouse a cookie for
business.
>> Yes, I read that all the time.
>> Same. Then you can say, well, hey, we
need you to drop this off at our
distribution center. We'll take care of
the distribution to our stores, but
please do not arrive at our store, which
is great because then a it's not
clogging up your very limited parking
lot space, but b then you actually can
stock stuff in your stores with your own
employees. You don't have
representatives of brands wandering
around working in your stores without
aligned interests. Kind of like steering
the direction of your business without
you realizing it. And we didn't talk
that much about all this, but theft is a
huge problem. And being able to only
have your own employees in your own
stores is just much better security. So
you've got all that combined with then
better coordination of labor schedules
cuz you're the one paying all the people
who are showing up to your stores. So
it's this better customer experience and
it lets you pass on the discounts to
your customers. But again, it all stems
from that one promise of when you show
up to a Trader Joe's as a customer, I
may not get everything I need, but I
will get great stuff.
>> Yep. And this also plays into the social
experience. Trader Joe's intentionally
mostly does the shelf stocking during
opening hours. This is very different
than other grocerers that do almost all
of their stocking at night when the
store is either closed or if it's a
24-hour store where very few customers
are there. Trader Joe's wants their
employees doing the shelf stocking with
the customers as they're shopping.
>> Well, you kind of have to because of the
rapid inventory turnover. I mean, if
you're only stocking 4,000 SKs and
you're doing a ton of sales in that
store, it means you're selling through
that whole inventory really fast. I
mean, I saw one stat that they turn over
their inventory 60 times per year, which
is more than once a week. They sell
through everything in the store. You
found one in that podcast with Dan Bane
where he said that there are some stores
that actually sell through twice a week.
>> Yeah. And that's on an average across
the whole product assortment twice a
week. That's like a hundred times a year
on a product level. This is what you
were saying a minute ago about why you
need to be stocking while customers are
shopping for the most popular products
in the most popular stores. You're
turning multiple times a day.
>> Yeah, that's true. The entire store
would get emptied out every 3 to 6 days,
which means products will probably get
emptied out every few hours.
>> Think about Tuck Chuck. That display has
to be replenished multiple times a day
in most stores.
>> Such a good point. It's funny that I've
been thinking about all the ways this is
similar and different to Costco because
a lot of this will rhyme. On that
episode, we pointed out that the rapid
inventory turns meant that you could
sell through your inventory before the
net30 payment was due. And the benefit
there is that your suppliers are
effectively financing your entire
inventory and you don't have to tie up
your own working capital in the
inventory.
>> This is amazing. I know where you're
going. Complete opposite with Trader
Joe's.
>> Trader Joe's does the opposite. Yes,
>> they pay upfront
>> and they pay on delivery.
>> Yes, they pay cash on delivery.
>> You just have cash as soon as you drop
something off at their loading dock.
This gives them a huge edge of being a
preferred customer for these vendors
that those companies never have any cash
flow issue or waiting issue. As soon as
they drop it off, Trader Joe's makes
good on the payment.
>> I have never heard of any other retailer
that does this cash on delivery of
inventory. Everybody else, Costco,
Amazon, Walmart.
>> Yeah. Oh, pay in 60 days, 90 days.
>> Yeah. A critical part of the business
model is the cash float that they are
selling the items before they pay for
them.
>> Trader Joe's has said, "Nah, we don't
care about that whole part of the
industry.
>> We would rather have the benefit that we
get from paying suppliers quickly than
the benefit we get from the vendors
financing our inventory.
>> We're not worried that we're going to
sell the inventory." Yeah. Yes, that is
true. They actually take risk, too. A
lot of traditional grocery stores are
kind of like a consignment basis where
you still own the inventory even though
it's sitting on the retailer shelves.
The brands are actually still taking
risk even though it's in the store.
>> That's not the Trader Joe's philosophy.
>> That's right. Which of course gets to
private label, which dramatically
simplifies your business model if you
can get customers to be game for it.
Well, I think there are a couple things
you got to keep in mind about Private
Label at Trader Joe's. And the most
important is that the job Private Label
is doing for Trader Joe's is completely
different than the job Private Label is
doing at every other retailer.
Everywhere else, Private Label is code
for same but cheaper,
>> right? It's generic. It's unbranded.
>> At Trader Joe's, private label is code
for this is a differentiated product.
The other critical thing I think about
private label for Trader Joe's that fits
into the next puzzle piece is the
marketing strategy.
>> Trader Joe's is built on
storybased product marketing just like a
wine merchant.
>> Nobody else is built that way. They're
built on brand-based marketing where
most of if not all of the marketing is
being done by the brands on a mass
market often price and deal driven
basis. Whereas Trader Joe's marketing
strategy is all about long- form
storytelling
and that only works because they have
differentiated unique products.
>> Yep, totally does. All of this really
leads to low overhead. When you need to
do fewer things in your business, you
just need fewer fixed costs. And so when
you have fewer SKUs and smaller stores
and more narrowly scoped operations and
fewer suppliers, you have to work with
>> fewer media channels and marketing
initiatives.
>> Yes. Higher employee pay or deeper
product knowledge or just less overhead
overall, which means you can charge your
customers less for items. That to me is
the puzzle. I have a bunch of things
they don't do in Y, but they're all kind
of obvious at this point. No sales or
coupons. That just drives your customers
to wait for sales. No loyalty programs,
cuz again, overhead costs to administer.
They have a funny quote on this. We're
loyal to all of our customers rather
than trying to buy loyalty through
rewards or discounts.
>> There's also this amazing thing about
Trader Joe's that's so different than
the rest of the retail industry. As best
as I or anybody else can tell, they
don't collect any data. I know. I was
trying to figure that out, too.
>> Every other retailer basically are like
data operations.
>> Yes. How much can we personalize a
circular for you?
>> Trader Joe's doesn't care about any of
it.
>> It's so true. There's no account when
I'm checking out.
>> They have no individual shopper data.
Like, I'm sure they have store data and
product data, but nothing about you.
>> And on the whole like we don't do
technology thing. So, they have no PA
system in the store. They use a bell,
which is cute and actually feels much
nicer than the sort of oppressive PA
system of a grocery store. There's no
screens in a store. There's no computers
on the floor.
>> They didn't even have price scanners
until Dan Bane became CEO in 2001.
>> And I think they're not like
anti-technology,
but I think anytime they're considering
a technology, they're not looking around
and saying, "Oh, we got to do digital
transformation cuz everyone else is
doing it." I think they're saying,
"Wait, why would we do that? and how
does it fit into our particular business
model? Cuz like they adopted desktop
publishing to be able to accomplish the
fearless flyer for a hundth of the cost
that they would have done it otherwise,
but all of this other technology they've
decided doesn't suit them and just adds
overhead costs.
>> And they say like, "Hey, we always
evaluate this stuff and we compare it
against investing in opening the next
store and opening the next store is
always wildly more profitable, so we
just do that."
>> Yep. So true.
All right. Well, that's it for my ballet
of how all of this reinforces each other
for why Trader Joe's works
>> and what a beautiful ballet it is. All
right, with that, let's move into
analysis.
>> I actually did basically my whole
playbook throughout the story there.
Let's do power though and analyze seven
powers framework. So for anyone who's
new, power is what enables a business to
achieve persistent differential returns
or to be more profitable than their
closest competitor and do so
sustainably. So David, at various points
in Trader Joe's, which of these do you
think they had?
>> You got to remember about power, it's
all relative to the other players in the
industry.
>> Yeah. So, scale economies, the first one
that exists in so many of the companies
we cover. Sure, of course, Trader Joe's
has economies of scale, but relative to
their competitors in the grocery
industry, they definitely don't. They're
much lower scale.
>> Oh, I disagree. On a per skew basis, I
think Trader Joe's sells more nuts than
>> Okay, that's fair. I mean, think about
if it's against Safeway and Safeway has
30,000 SKs and they have four. I bet
it's actually pretty competitive on who
moves more volume.
>> Yeah. Okay. Or Yeah. Look at Tupac
Chuck, too.
>> Yes.
>> Great example. Okay.
>> I mean, it's got to be the best selling
wine in the world.
>> Interesting. So, maybe they do have
scale economies then on a skew basis. I
buy that. They don't on like a real
estate basis or a labor basis or
anything like that.
>> Right. That's exactly right. But on a
buying power per skew, yeah, they
probably do.
>> They are still counterpositioned. It's
rare for a large company to be
counterpositioned. It's very easy to see
the examples of counterpositioning in
the early days like stocking liquor when
that was too difficult or off strategy
for 7-Eleven to do. But things like
we're not going to collect your data.
Safeway can't not collect your data
>> or we're not going to participate in the
whole shadow economy of the CPG
supermarket industrial complex. We're
not going to do stocking fees, slotting
fees. We're not going to do co-op
marketing.
>> Right. I think technically no one does
slotting fees anymore. Everyone's hiding
the ball and found a new way to charge
their suppliers.
>> Yeah, that money went somewhere else for
sure.
>> Kroger can't not do that. It's part of
the business model at this point. who
can't shake out of it. So, I think that
Trader Joe's is still counterpositioned
in that way.
>> I do really think they also have a
counterpositioning in their target
customer focused on non-families. Again,
not that Trader Joe's can't be good for
families, but everybody else is 100%
catering to families. And Trader Joe's
is saying, "Crowded stores, great. Small
parking lots, great. Individual
servings, great. We're here for you."
>> Right? Network economies. I think this
is non-existent. Yep.
>> Just because somebody else shops at
Trader Joe's doesn't make it better or
worse for me to go there. Switching
costs. At first, I was going to say
there's no switching cost, but I don't
know. You get used to liking some of
those foods. You don't want to shop
somewhere else that doesn't have them.
In fact, this is funny. My wife rags on
me all the time for this. Co hit. We ran
out of all of our snacks and I was
sitting there thinking, I really wish I
had a dark chocolate peanut butter cup
from Trader Joe's. I love those and I
eat like one a night after dinner and it
had been like a week.
>> You're so disciplined. What a night
>> of it being completely empty, that
little plastic tub. And at some point I
was like, "How am I going to get these
cuz I can't go to the grocery store."
And I look on Amazon. Now, mind you,
this is like a $3 product. and someone's
selling it for $19.
And I was like,
>> I'mma buy that.
>> I'mma buy that. And it arrived. And of
course, it's in like real jank packaging
cuz it's someone bought it and
repackaged it. And my wife is just like,
you got to be kidding me. You bought
this for $19. You you paid a 7x markup
or whatever on.
>> So, uh, they have switching cost. There
you go.
>> Apparently, my willingness to pay is
actually 7x what they're charging.
amazing. Perhaps somewhat related, they
have huge, huge brand power. You know,
especially today, they really do have
differentiated products
and
a lot of the products are differentiated
on something other than what the actual
product is today.
>> Differentiated on packaging.
>> Yeah. And that's where I think brand is
really playing a part here. Yeah.
>> Take the peanut butter cups. You can get
peanut butter cups elsewhere.
>> Look, if I felt it was the same peanut
butter cup that I had grown accustomed
to, I would have bought it from
elsewhere. Yes.
>> Okay, fair enough.
>> But yeah, I like these peanut butter
pretzel nuggets more cuz they're the
Trader Joe's one. And I'm confident that
there are grocery stores that sell
something almost identical. And to me,
it's just not the same thing, even
though it's probably the same thing.
Process power. This one's always a hard
one to nail down. I'm sure they have
some of it, but I don't think it's the
thing that sets them apart. And Cornered
Resource, I guess at this point, the
supplier relationships are cuz some of
these supplier relationships make a huge
amount of their only product or largest
product just for Trader Joe's. So,
having those contracts locked up is
cornered.
>> Yep. Sounds right to me. The scale
economy is surprising. You're right.
They do have it. It's just on a skew
level.
>> It's the same thing with Costco. When
Costco buys a skew,
>> they really buy a skew.
>> It can be the largest source of revenue
for that supplier.
>> Yep.
>> By the way, we should say for anyone
who's wondering, Costco is a much much
much bigger business than Trader Joe's.
They're sort of cousins of each other in
business model. Different in all the
ways we've talked about, but Costco's
revenue is 10x, maybe more. Last year,
it was $275 billion. Now, margins are a
different story. They famously only mark
up 11 to 14%. And Trader Joe's is
probably I don't know, seems like about
twice that, but Costco is much much more
scaled business.
>> Yep. And to my point about
international, Costco is an
international business.
>> Totally fair point. All right, David.
So, you've now thought about Trader
Joe's specifically for a month, but
we've known we were doing this for a
while. What is your quintessence as you
think about this business?
>> Yes, I've thought about this a lot. My
quintessence for Trader Joe's is that
there are no broken promises in the
chain. So, every aspect of how Trader
Joe's works is genuinely a promise
ultimately to their customers that they
are keeping. The real estate strategy,
we're in your neighborhoods. The product
strategy we have differentiated products
that are truly differentiated on some
dimension product nature, price,
packaging, story, etc. The labor
strategy, they genuinely pay their
workers way more than the industry and
their labor force stays with them way
longer than the rest of the industry.
Meaning you will develop actual
relationships with the people who work
at your Trader Joe's store.
>> Yep. the marketing strategy, the
storytelling, the merchandising. It's
the opposite of the CPG supermarket
industrial complex. It's not the, "Hey,
flashy deal. Look at this fat of the
week. It's a merchandised
product."
>> Yep.
>> There's no broken promises all the way
through.
>> I like that. Mine is a zoomed out
framing of how we've talked about all
these things on the episode and that is
it all boils down to independence and
control. Trader Joe's has built a system
where they are just not that dependent
on others in the ecosystem in a way that
supermarkets traditionally are.
Supermarkets are effectively one half of
a partnership with CPG companies.
Content is on there too because content
is where all the ads are placed on TV
that then drive the people to buy the
CPG products at the grocery store.
>> I feel like Ben Thompson used to write
about this that it was the American holy
trinity of General Motors and the NFL
and Proctor and Gamble. Yes, it's a
partnership, but it's not a great
partnership because as soon as the CPG
product becomes so wildly
differentiated, they're going to start
commanding somehow squeezing more in the
value chain. Or, let's say the grocery
store got differentiated, they're going
to start squeezing more in the value
chain. Trader Joe's has been a 50-year
exercise to ensure their independence
where no one has leverage over them.
individual little things like a landlord
has leverage over them in a store
negotiation or a supplier does for a
given skew. But at scale overall, Trader
Joe's is really, really resilient from
external
things that could dramatically shake
their business. They've built, I think
we talk about this a lot, stored
potential energy in their business that
just make them more resilient. And it's
crazy that the internet happened and it
hasn't been bad for them. They've grown
just as fast in the internet era as the
non-in era. It's hard to imagine things
that could shock them more. There is the
perfect existence proof of this in co.
Pretty much the only way that all other
grocerers could deal with COVID was
Instacart or doing their own delivery,
which actually Instacart powers a lot of
that now as a white label service, which
is fascinating. But anyway, Trader Joe's
said, "Nope, we're just not going to do
that. We're going to find a way to
operate our stores during CO." And they
didn't miss a beat.
>> Yep. So, my question for you to close
this out is, how important do you think
private ownership is to making all this
work? Cuz on our Rolex episode, we said
it's really important that they're owned
by a foundation. And on our IKEA
episode, it said really important that
it's family and foundation controlled.
And on our Mars episode, we said it's
really important. Is this really
important that they're not a publicly
traded company? There's the fascinating
other example of Costco,
>> right?
>> Which again, of course, is very
different on a lot of dimensions, but
spiritually aligned. Joe actually says
in his autobiography,
>> he looks up to them.
>> Yeah. The one store that's out there
that is cut from the same cloth as us is
Costco.
>> Yep.
>> And they're obviously doing great as a
successful public company. I think in
this case though,
yeah, probably the fact that Teao Alrech
bought it when Joe needed to sell made a
huge huge huge difference.
>> Okay. So, play it forward. What do you
think it would have affected like in the
Rolex scenario? I think they wouldn't
have been able to buy the many years of
probably bad financial returns that they
had amidst the courts crisis if they
were publicly traded. What do you think
management would face pressure on? Cuz
as best we could tell in recent years,
they've grown 11% per year. They've
gotten more profitable every year.
Shareholders should love that. The
biggest thing to me is just steadfastly
not participating in the CPG supermarket
industrial complex. There would be so
much pressure I think from public
markets to be like, well, can't you just
take like a little bit of co-op
marketing dollars? Like a perfect
example, the demos in the store. Trader
Joe's has lots of samples and lots of
demos.
>> Oh, if you walk up to someone and say,
"What does that taste like?" They rip
open a bag and just let you try it.
>> Oh yeah. But there's also an organized
program part of the store where they
showing samples. For a while they had
the vendors do that. That's like
standard practice in the industry is the
vendors even in private label. Whoever
makes the stuff they come to your store,
they do the sampling and the demos
because they in theory should be more
knowledgeable at the product and then
they also finance it. So like the free
items that are given out paid for that
cost is eaten by the vendors. And Trader
Joe's actually did this for a while and
then they started running into problems
like you might expect of customers would
come up to the people that were doing
the sample demos be like, "Oh, where do
I find this? You know, what do you think
about that?" And they'd have to say,
"Uh, sorry, I don't work here." And this
happened enough that Trader Joe's is
like, "You know what? It's not worth it.
We're going to do this in-house. We're
going to have our crew members do this.
We're going to train our crew members
more on the new products. We're going to
have them rotate and do the sampling."
And people in the industry were like,
"You guys are crazy. What are you doing?
Why are you paying for this? Nobody else
does this." They said, "Yeah, we know,
but we're going to do it anyway."
>> Yeah. So, my take on this is it was
really important for a long time, but I
think if they went public anytime in the
last 10, 15 years, it would have been
totally fine.
>> Really important for a while. I mean,
now, yeah, totally. It could be public.
It could be fine.
>> But in the good times, it's always fine
to be public. It's about in the
catastrophic events, are you able to
control your own destiny?
>> Yep.
>> All right. I know you've got some fun
stuff up your sleeve.
>> Yeah. Okay. Couple fun little uh Trader
Joe's carveouts before we get to our
personal carveouts. My first one was
Pirate Joe's that I talked about
earlier. Maybe my favorite thing about
Pirate Joe's is that if you go to the
Pirate Joe's website that used to exist,
it now just redirects to the Wikipedia
article all about Pirate Joe's and the
international legal incident that it
caused.
>> It's awesome. Second was, you mentioned
this, but Trader Joe's doesn't use PA
systems. It uses bells. I never knew
what the bell rings meant. Until doing
research.
>> One bell means come to the register.
>> Yep. Open a new checkout line.
>> Two bells is I need a manager.
>> Nope, that's three bells. Two bells is a
customer needs help carrying their bags
to their car or whatever. And then three
bells is we need the captain or the
first mate. We need a manager.
>> But basically, everything can be
expressed through those things. So, why
do you need a PA system?
>> Totally. It's great. And then my last
one, I've got a little quiz for you. So,
after Joe retired from Trader Joe's, he
had a whole second career dabbling in
doing a few like retail turnaround jobs.
As you might expect, lots of retailers
valued Joe's advice. and he started
eventually just sitting on corporate
boards during which he joined the board
of a company that a young entrylevel
employee would work at concurrently
during the same time they overlapped.
And that young entry-level employee
would go on to become a central
character in the acquired cinematic
universe and in modern business history.
Can you guess what company that was? O,
>> give me some hint. What industry?
>> I'll give you a hint. I figured you
might need a hint. This might give it
away. It is a restaurant group.
>> Starbucks.
>> Good guess. Nope. Denny's.
>> Denny's. Oh, Joe was on the board of
Denny's while a young high schoolaged
Jensen Juan,
>> no way,
>> was a bus boy
and waiter slinging sausages at Denny's.
>> Amazing. I am confident they never cross
paths.
>> Yes, me too. But there is a direct
connection between Trader Joe's and
Nvidia
>> co-workers. You heard it here first.
Trader Joe and Jensen Hong were
co-workers at one point in time.
>> I was really wondering if you were going
to pick up on that in the research or
not.
>> I'm glad I got you.
>> That's amazing.
>> All right, should we do our personal
carveouts?
>> Let's do it. I because I can't help
myself ordering every Apple product and
most new tech gadgets that come out and
then just having a giant pile of them. I
ordered AirPods 3 on launch day with my
new phone and they are awesome. It just
is crazy how Apple gets better and
better and better and better iteratively
each time with these things. And I think
the sound quality is better. There's
days I listen to so many audiobooks and
podcasts that I actually don't notice it
as much cuz I feel like anytime I'm
listening to something, it's words, not
music. But the fit's amazing. It's much
more granular now.
>> The fit is better now.
>> It's much better. The noise cancellation
is insane. I think a lot of it's
physical cancellation. Maybe the
algorithms are better, too. And they're
more comfortable over a long period of
time. Like on long runs, I noticed they
just stay in my ears and are more
comfortable. So, I think they're great.
>> I can second that. I got them, too. By
far the best AirPods yet. I still prefer
the Meta Glasses, though. Like, I just
have realized I really don't like having
things in my ears.
>> Well, good thing there's a new one of
those, too.
>> Yeah.
All right. My Carveout is an update in
my ongoing carveout saga this summer and
fall.
>> Oh, did you buy another video game
console?
>> We got a Switch. Or I should say, more
accurately,
>> my older daughter had her fourth
birthday last weekend and I got her a
Switch. We did an original Switch. I got
her an OLED Switch. It's
>> part of my thought process like she
doesn't need the Switch, too,
>> but Mario Kart is going to be perfect.
So, Mario Kart 8, I've played a lot of
Mario Karts over the last 25 years.
Mario Kart 8, I think, is the best. It's
just amazing.
>> Perfect.
>> We get an OLED Switch for her. We'll be
able to play together in tabletop mode.
It has been amazing. So, if I thought
about it, maybe I could have predicted
this. You know, she's four and she's
obsessed with princesses and being a
princess. She doesn't actually care at
all about winning.
She cares about being all the different
princesses. And so every race she
chooses a different princess.
>> And then this is so fun. What she has
decided she really loves about the game
is when you fall off the track and the
little cloud guy comes and picks you up
with the fishing pole and towes you back
onto the track. She thinks it's a fairy
and so she loves when the fairy comes
and picks up her princess and puts her
back on the track. After every race she
says, "I want to pick a new princess and
then I want to pick a new course and I
want a course where we fall off." And
she goes,
>> "Rainbow road every time."
>> Yeah. Is this one where we fall off? Is
this one where we fall off? Is this one
where we fall off?
>> That's so funny.
>> And then I race as fast as I can. And
then another like 10 minutes go by where
she just spends the whole time driving
off the road and the little cloud guy
towes her, you know, incrementally
forward each time and she has a blast.
It's wonderful.
>> That's awesome.
>> Parenting so unexpected, so fun.
>> Congratulations.
All right. Well, listeners, we have some
thank yous. First, thank you to our
partners this season. JP Morgan Payments
trusted reliable payments infrastructure
for your business, no matter the scale.
JPorggan.com/acquired.
Sentry, the best way to monitor for
issues in your software and fix them
before users get mad. That's
centry.io/acquired.
Work OS, the best way to make your app
enterprise ready, starting with single
signon in just a few lines of code.
That's work os.com. and Shopify, the
best place to sell online, whether
you're a large enterprise or just a
founder with a big idea.
Shopify.com/acquired.
You can click the links in the show
notes to learn more about all of them.
And as always, all of our sources for
this episode are linked in the show
notes. I have a huge thank you to
Benjamin Lure for writing the fantastic
book, The Secret Life of Groceries, and
as always to Arvin Navaratnam at Worldly
Partners for his amazing write up on
Trader Joe's linked in the show notes
for anyone who wants his awesome
analytical take on why the business
succeeded. David, I know you've got
some, too.
>> Yeah. And then continuing on the book
front, Mark Gardner's really fun book,
Build a Brand Like Trader Joe's, about
his experience going and working as a
crew member at Trader Joe's for a year.
So helpful in the research, a very
entertaining read, too, by the way. And
then Joe Colom,
>> yes,
>> writing his autobiography, Becoming
Trader Joe, it's a great book and
obviously the main source for this
episode. And then just two specific
research thank yous for this one. both
to Instacart. First to Ravi Gupta of
Sequoia Capital, formerly CFO of
Instacart when we finalized that we were
going to do this Trader Joe's episode.
RVY was of course our first call cuz we
were like, "Help us with grocery,
please."
>> Yo, we don't know anybody in the grocery
industry.
Help us out. Ruby was incredibly
helpful, including connecting me with
Chris Rogers, the current CEO of
Instacart. Chris was also incredibly
helpful giving me perspective on the
industry and e-commerce within it. Thank
you, Rvy and Chris and all the other
grocery folks and resources who you
connected us with and pointed us to.
>> Yep. Well, if you like this episode,
check out our episodes obviously on
Costco. I also think you'll probably
like IKEA. Any others to point folks
toward, David?
>> Walmart, of course, for sure.
>> Absolutely. Walmart. Perhaps Amazon part
one also may be of interest since this
is effectively the anti- Amazon. It's
the uh everything store and the very few
things store.
>> Oh, and Ben, how could we forget? We
made an episode on Whole Foods back in
the day.
>> We did
>> the day that Amazon bought the company.
>> A little bit embarrassing. What was
that? 2016, 2017. It was a little bit
amateur hour. I didn't relisten to it
for uh this episode, so I don't know if
it holds up or not, but yes,
>> we do have an episode on Whole Foods.
>> I feel good about anything basically
2020 onward.
>> Yeah,
>> after you finish this episode, come talk
about it with us at acquired.fm/slack.
Get all the goodies, including the
pictures and graphics and stuff that we
talked about and corrections, and help
us pick the next episodes by joining our
email list. That's acquired.fm/email.
And with that, listeners, we'll see you
next time.
>> We'll see you next time. And as Joe
would say in his radio slots, thank you
for listening.
>> Thank you for listening.
>> Who got the truth?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Who got
the truth now? Huh?